
1. The correct IUPAC name of cis- platin is
(1) dichloride diammine platinum                
(2) diammine dichloride platinum (II)
(3) diammine dichloride platinum(IV)            
(4) diammine dichloride platinum (0)

2. Crystal Field Splitting Energy (CFSE) for [CoCl₆]⁴⁻ is 18000 cm⁻¹. The Crystal Field splitting Energy
(CFSE) for [CoCl₄]²⁻ will be
(1) 10,000 cm⁻¹        
(2) 18000 cm⁻¹          
(3) 16000 cm⁻¹           
(4) 8000 cm⁻¹

3. The complex hexammineplatinum (IV) chloride will give _____ number of ions on ionization.
(1) 2                   
(2) 5                   
(3) 4                    
(4) 3

4. In the following pairs of halogen compounds, which compound undergoes faster SN1 reaction?

(i)
```
Cl
|
/|\    and    \/\/\
/ | \          /    \
|    |
Cl
```

(ii)
```
Cl
|
\/\/\/\    and    \/\/\/\/\Cl
```

(1)
```
(i)   Cl
|
/|\     (ii)  \/\/\/\Cl
/ | \
Cl
```

(2)
```
(i)    Cl      (ii)    Cl
|               |
\/\         \/\/\/\
```

(3)
```
(i)    Cl      (ii)    Cl
|               |
/|\         \/\/\/
/ | \
```

(4)
```
(i)    Cl      (ii)
|
\/\         H3C\/\/\/\Cl
```

5. The only Lanthanoid which is radioactive
(1) Praseodymium        
(2) Lanthanum           
(3) Cerium               
(4) Promethium

6. All Cu(II) halides are known, except the iodide, the reason for it is that
(1) Cu²⁺ ion has smaller size
(2) Iodide is bulky ion
(3) Cu²⁺ oxidises iodide to iodine
(4) Cu²⁺ has much more negative hydration enthalpy


7. An organic compound with molecular formula C₇H₈O dissolves in NaOH and gives a characteristic colour with FeCl₃. On treatment with bromine, it gives a tribromo derivative C₇H₅OBr₃. The compound is

(1) p- Cresol          
(2) Benzyl alcohol     
(3) o- Cresol          
(4) m- Cresol

8. In Kolbes reaction the reacting substances are
(1) Phenol and CHCl₃                          
(2) Sodium phenate and CO₂
(3) Phenol and CCl₄                           
(4) Sodium phenate and CCl.

9. The major product obtained when ethanol is heated with excess of conc. H₂SO₄ at 443K is
(1) methane            
(2) ethene             
(3) ethyne             
(4) ethane

10. Among the following, the products formed by the reaction of anisole with HI are:
(1) Phenol + Methane                          (2) Phenol + Iodomethane
(3) Sodium phenate + Methanol                 (4) Benzene + Methanol

11. Which one of the following Chlorohydrocarbon readily undergoes solvolysis?
(1)
```
CH₂CH₂Cl
```
(2) CH₂ = CHCl

(3)
```
Cl
```
(4)
```
CH₂Cl
```

12. Identify the products A and B in the reactions:
R − X + AgCN → A + Ag X
R − X + KCN → B + KX
(1) A = RNC; B = RNC                          (2) A = R − CN; B = RCN
(3) A = RCN; B = RCN                          (4) A = RNC; B = RCN

13. Reaction by which benzaldehyde cannot be prepared is
(1) Benzoyl chloride +H₂ → (N-BaSO₄)
(2) Benzene +CO + HCl → (anhydrous AlCl₃)
(3) Benzoic acid → (Zn-Hg and con. HCl)
(4) Toluene → ((i) CrO₂Cl₂ in CS₂, (ii) H₃O⁺)

14. The test to differentiate between pentan−2−one and pentan−1−one is
(1) Iodoform test      
(2) Baeyer's test      
(3) Benedict's test    
(4) Fehling's test

15. In Carbylamine test for primary amines the resulting foul smelling product is
(1) COCl₂               
(2) CH₃NCl₂             
(3) CH₃CN              
(4) CH₃NC

16. Ethanoic acid undergoes Hell-Volhard Zelinsky reaction but Methanoic acid does not, because of
(1) higher acidic strength of ethanoic acid than methanoic acid
(2) presence of α − H atom in ethanoic acid
(3) presence of α − H atom in ethanoic acid
(4) absence of α − H atom in ethanoic acid

17. The general name of the compound formed by the reaction between aldehyde and alcohol is
(1) Acetate             
(2) Ester               
(3) Acetal              
(4) Glycol

18. Which institute has approved the emergency use of 2-deoxy-D-Glucose as additive therapy for COVID-19 patients?
(1) Drug Controller General of India            
(2) Indian Council of Medical Research
(3) World Health Organisation                   
(4) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare

19. A Nucleic acid, whether DNA or RNA gives on complete hydrolysis, two purine bases, two pyrimidine bases, a pentose sugar and phosphoric acid. Nucleotides which are intermediate products in the hydrolysis contain
(1) Purine or pyrimidine base, a pentose sugar and ortho-phosphoric acid
(2) purine or pyrimidine base and pentose sugar.
(3) a purine base, pentose sugar and ortho-phosphoric acid
(4) purine or pyrimidine base and ortho-phosphoric acid

20. A secondary amine is
(1) a compound in which 2 of the hydrogen of NH₃ have been replaced by organic groups
(2) an organic compound with two NH₂ group
(3) a compound with two carbon atom and an NH₂ group
(4) a compound with an NH₂ group on the carbon atom in number 2 position

21. Which of the following is correctly matched?
(1) Polyster – tetrafluoroethene                
(2) Nylon – acrylonitrile
(3) Teflon – copralactum                        
(4) Bakelite - Novolac

22. Elements X, Y and Z have atomic numbers 19, 37 and 55 respectively. Which of the following statements is true about them?
(1) Y would have the highest ionization potential
(2) Their ionisation potential would increase with increasing atomic number.
(3) Y would have an ionisation potential between those of X and Z.
(4) Z would have the highest ionisation potential.

23. In oxygen and carbon molecule the bonding is
(1) O₂ : 0σ, 2π; C₂ : 2σ, 0π                    
(2) O₂ : 1σ, 1π; C₂ : 1σ, 1π
(3) O₂ : 2σ, 0π; C₂ : 0σ, 2π                    
(4) O₂ : 1σ, 1π; C₂ : 0σ, 2π

24. Which is most VISCOUS?
(1) Glycerol            
(2) Methanol            
(3) Ethanol             
(4) Ethylene glycol

25. The volume of 2.8 g of CO at 27°C and 0.821 atm. pressure is $$(R = 0.08210 \text{ lit.atm.K}^{-1}\text{mol}^{-1})$$
(1) 30 litres           
(2) 0.3 litres          
(3) 1.5 litres           
(4) 3 litres

26. The work done when 2 moles of an ideal gas expands reversibly and isothermally from a volume of 1L to 10L at 300 K is $$(R = 0.0083 \text{ kJ K mol}^{-1})$$
(1) 58.5 kJ             
(2) 11.5 kJ             
(3) 5.8 kJ              
(4) 0.115 kJ


27. An aqueous solution of alcohol contains 18 g of water and 414 g of ethyl alcohol. The mole fraction of water is
(1) 0.9
(2) 0.1
(3) 0.4
(4) 0.7

28. If wavelength of photon is 2.2×10⁻¹¹ m and h = 6.6×10⁻³⁴ J s, then momentum of photon
(1) 6.89×10⁺⁴³ kg m s⁻¹
(2) 3×10⁻²³ kg m s⁻¹
(3) 3.33×10⁻²² kg m s⁻¹
(4) 1.452×10⁻⁴⁴ kg m s⁻¹

29. In which of the following compounds, an element exhibits two different oxidation states?
(1) N₃H
(2) NH₂CONH₂
(3) NH₄NO₃
(4) N₂H₄

30. Which of the following hydrides is electron deficient?
(1) B₂H₆
(2) NaH
(3) CaH₂
(4) CH₄

31. Amphoteric oxide among the following
(1) SnO₂
(2) BeO
(3) CO₂
(4) Ag₂O

32. Which property of CO₂ makes it biologically and geo-chemically important?
(1) Its high compressibility
(2) Its acidic nature
(3) Its colourless and odourless nature
(4) Its low solubility in water

33. The IUPAC name for

```
O       O
||      ||
CH₃—C—CH₂—CH₂—C—O—H
```

(1) 4- oxopentanoic acid
(2) 1- hydroxy pentance -1, 4- dione
(3) 1,4 - dioxopentanol
(4) 1- carboxybutan -3- one

34. 1 mole of HI is heated in a closed container of capacity of 2L. At equilibrium half a mole of HI is dissociated. The equilibrium constant of the reaction is
(1) 0.35
(2) 1
(3) 0.5
(4) 0.25

35. Which among the following has higest pH?
(1) 0.1 M NaOH
(2) 1 M HCl
(3) 1 M NaOH
(4) 1 M H₂SO₄

36. How many number of atoms are there in a cube based unit cell, having one atom on each corner and 2 atom on each body diagonal of cube?
(1) 9
(2) 8
(3) 6
(4) 4

37. Which of the following is NOT true about the amorphous solids?
(1) They are anisotropic nature.
(2) On heating they may become crystalline at certain temperature.
(3) They may become crystalline on keeping for long time.
(4) Amorphous solids can be moulded by heating.


38. Identify A and B in the reaction

```
Propene
\
\  HBr(Benzoylperoxide)
\----------------------> A(Major product)
/
/  HI
/-----------------------> B(Major product)
```

(1) A:CH₃ - CH - CH₃ ; B:CH₃ - CH - CH₃
      |     |
      Br    I

(2) A:CH₃ - CH₂ - CH₂ - Br; B:CH₃ - CH₂ - CH₂ - I

(3) A:CH₃ - CH₂ - CH₂ - Br; B:CH₃ - CH - CH₃
      |
      I

(4) A:CH₃ - CH - CH₃ ; B:CH₃ - CH₂ - CH₂ - I
      |
      Br

39. Vacant space in body centered cubic lattice unit cell is about
(1) 46%                 
(2) 32%                 
(3) 10%                 
(4) 23%

40. The rise in boiling point of a solution containing 1.8g of glucose in 100 g of solvent is 0.1°C . The molal elevation constant of the liquid is
(1) 10 K kg / mol       
(2) 0.1K kg / mol       
(3) 1 K kg / mol        
(4) 2 K kg /mol

41. If 3 g of glucose (molar mass = 180 g ) is dissolved in 60 g of water at 15°C , the osmotic pressure of the solution will be
(1) 5.57 atm            
(2) 0.34 atm            
(3) 0.65 atm            
(4) 6.57 atm

42. Which of the following colligative properties can provide molar mass of proteins, polymers and colloids with greater precision?
(1) Osmotic pressure
(2) Relative lowering of vapour pressure
(3) Elevation in boiling point
(4) Depression in freezing point

43. In Fuel cells _____________ are used as catalysts
(1) Lead - Manganese
(2) Platinum – Palladium
(3) Nickel – Cadmium
(4) Zinc - Mercury

44. The molar conductivity is maximum for the solution of concentration
(1) 0.001 M             
(2) 0.004 M             
(3) 0.002 M             
(4) 0.005 M

45. Alkali halides do not show dislocation defect because
(1) There is large difference in size of cation and anions.
(2) Cations and anions have low co-ordination number.
(3) Anions cannot be accommodated in vacant spaces.
(4) Cations and anions have almost equal size.

46. Solubility of a gas in a liquid increases with
(1) decrease of P and decrease of T
(2) increase of P and increase of T
(3) decrease of P and increase of T
(4) increase of P and decrease of T

47. For nth order of reaction, Half-life period is directly proportional to

(1) a¹⁻ⁿ                
(2) 1/aⁿ⁻¹             
(3) 1/a¹⁻ⁿ             
(4) aⁿ⁻¹


48. half-life of a reaction is found to be inversely proportional to the fifth power of its initial concentration, the order of reaction is
(1) 6
(2) 3
(3) 4
(4) 5

49. A first order reaction is half completed in 45 min. How long does it need 99.9% of the reaction to be completed?
(1) 20 Hours
(2) 5 Hours
(3) 7.5 Hours
(4) 10 Hours

50. The rate of the reaction:
CH₃COOC₂H₅ + NaOH → CH₃COONa + C₂H₅OH is given by the equation,

Rate = K = K[CH₃COOC₂H₅][NaOH]. If concentration is expressed in molL⁻¹, the unit of K is
(1) s⁻¹
(2) mol⁻² L² s⁻¹
(3) mol L⁻¹s⁻¹
(4) L mol⁻¹s⁻¹

51. Colloidal solution commonly used in the treatment of skin disease is
(1) Colloidal Antimony
(2) Colloidal Sulphur
(3) Colloidal Silver
(4) Colloidal Gold

52. Specific conductance of 0.1 M HNO₃ is 6.3×10⁻² ohm⁻¹ cm⁻¹. The molar conductance the solution is
(1) 63.0 ohm⁻¹cm² mol⁻¹
(2) 630 ohm⁻¹ cm² mol⁻¹
(3) 315ohm⁻¹cm² mol⁻¹
(4) 6.300 ohm⁻¹cm² mol⁻¹

53. For spontaneity of a cell, which is correct?
(1) ΔG = -ve
(2) ΔG = 0, ΔE = 0
(3) ΔG = -ve, ΔE = 0
(4) ΔG = +ve, ΔE = +ve

54. Which noble gas has least tendency to form compounds?
(1) Kr
(2) He
(3) Ne
(4) Ar

55. (NH₄)₂Cr₂O₇ on heating liberates a gas. The same gas will be obtained by
(1) treating Mg₃N₂ with H₂O
(2) hearing NH₄NO₃
(3) heating NH₄NO₂
(4) treating H₂O₂ with NaNO₂

56. The strong reducing property of hypophosphorous acid is due to
(1) presence of phosphorus in its highest oxidation state
(2) its concentration
(3) the positive valence of phosphorus
(4) two P−H bonds

57. A transition metal exists in its highest oxidation state. It is expected to behave as
(1) a reducing agent
(2) a chelating agent
(3) a central metal in a co-ordination compound
(4) an oxidation agent

58. What will be the value of x in Fe^x+, if the magnetic moment μ = √24 BM ?
(1) +1
(2) +2
(3) +3
(4) 0


59. Which can absorb larger volume of hydrogen gas?
(1) Colloidal Fe(OH)₃
(2) Finely divided nickel
(3) Colloidal solution of palladium
(4) Finely divided platinum

60. The property of halogens which is not correctly matched is
(1) F > Cl > Br > I (electron gain enthalpy)
(2) F > Cl > Br > I (ionization enthalpy)
(3) F > Cl > Br > I (electronegativity)
(4) I > Br > Cl > F (density)