
1. Which of the following possess zero dipole moment ?
(1) BF₃
(2) SO₂
(3) CO₂
(4) BeCl₂

2. The number of π-bonds and σ-bonds present in naphthalene are respectively
(1) 5, 19
(2) 6, 19
(3) 5, 20
(4) 5, 11

3. The reaction in which ΔH > ΔU is
(1) CaCO₃(s) → CaO(s) + CO₂(g)
(2) N₂(g) + O₂(g) → 2NO(g)
(3) CH₄(g) + 2O₂(g) → CO₂(g) + 2H₂O(l)
(4) N₂(g) + 3H₂(g) → 2NH₃(g)

4. The number of moles of electron required to reduce 0.2 mole of Cr₂O₇²⁻ to Cr³⁺
(1) 6
(2) 1.2
(3) 0.6
(4) 12

5. In the reaction B(OH)₃ + 2H₂O → [B(OH)₄]⁻ + H₃O⁺
B(OH)₃ functions as
(1) Lewis base
(2) Protonic acid
(3) Lewis acid
(4) Bronsted acid

6. Match the following acids with their pKa values:

| Acid             | pKa       |
| ---------------- | --------- |
| a. Phenol        | i. 16     |
| b. p-Nitrophenol | ii. 0.78  |
| c. Ethanol       | iii. 10.6 |
| d. Picric acid   | iv. 7.1   |

(1) ii   i   iii   iv
(2) iii   iv   i   ii
(3) iv   ii   iii   i
(4) iii   i   iv   ii

7. Which of the following can be used to test the acidic nature of ethanol ?
(1) Na₂CO₃
(2) Blue litmus solution
(3) Na metal
(4) NaHCO₃


8. The reagents A, B and C respectively are:

(1) NaBH₄, alk. KMnO₄, H₂/Pd
(2) H₂/Pd, PCC, NaBH₄
(3) H₂/Pd, alk. KMnO₄, NaBH₄
(4) NaBH₄, PCC, H₂/Pd

9. Propanoic acid undergoes HVZ reaction to give chloropropanoic acid. The product obtained is:

(1) as stronger as propanoic acid
(2) stronger acid than propanoic acid
(3) stronger than dichloropropanoic acid
(4) weaker acid than propanoic acid

10. P $\xrightarrow{\text{H₂/Pd - BaSO₄}}$ Q
(i) conc. NaOH → R + S
(ii) dil. HCl

R and S form benzyl benzoate when treated with each other. Hence P is:

(1) C₆H₅CH₂OH
(2) C₆H₅CHO
(3) C₆H₅COOH
(4) C₆H₅COCl

11. Among the following, the main reactions occurring in blast furnace during extraction of iron from haematite are:

i. Fe₂O₃ + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO₂
ii. FeO + SiO₂ → FeSiO₃
iii. Fe₂O₃ + 3C → 2Fe + 3CO
iv. CaO + SiO₂ → CaSiO₃

(1) iii and iv
(2) i and ii
(3) i and iv
(4) ii and iii

12. Which of the following pair contains 2 lone pair of electrons on the central atom?

(1) H₂O, NF₃
(2) I₃⁻, H₃O⁺
(3) SO₃²⁻, IF₅
(4) XeF₄, NH₃

13. Which of the following statement is correct?

(1) Cl₂ is a stronger oxidizing agent than F₂
(2) Cl₂ oxidises H₂O to O₂ but F₂ does not
(3) Fluoride is a good oxidizing agent
(4) F₂ oxidises H₂O to O₂ but Cl₂ does not


14. 0.1 mole of XeF₆ is treated with 1.8 g of water. The product obtained is
(1) XeO₃F₂
(2) XeO₃
(3) Xe + XeO₃
(4) XeOF₄

15. In the reaction of gold with aquaregia, oxidation state of Nitrogen changes from
(1) +6 to +4
(2) +4 to +2
(3) +3 to +1
(4) +5 to +2

16. The vitamin that helps in clotting of blood is
(1) C
(2) A
(3) K
(4) B₂

17. The polymer containing five methylene groups in its repeating unit is
(1) Nylon 6
(2) Nylon 6, 6
(3) Bakelite
(4) Dacron

18. Cis-1, 4-polyisoprene is called
(1) Neoprene
(2) Buna-N
(3) Natural rubber
(4) Buna-S

19. Which cleansing agent gets precipitated in hard water ?
(1) Sodium stearate
(2) Sodium lauryl sulphate
(3) Sodium dodecyl benzene sulphonate
(4) Cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide

20. Anti-histamine among the following is
(1) Morphine
(2) Bromopheneramine
(3) Chloroxylenol
(4) Amoxycillin


21. The elements in which electrons are progressively filled in 4f orbital are called

(1) Transition elements
(2) Actinoids
(3) Halogens
(4) Lanthanoids

22. Incorrect statement with reference to Ce(Z=58)

(1) Ce in +3 oxidation state is more stable than in +4.
(2) Ce⁴⁺ is a reducing agent.
(3) Ce shows common oxidation states of +3 and +4.
(4) Atomic size of Ce is more than that of La.

23. A mixture of NaCl and K₂Cr₂O₇ is heated with conc. H₂SO₄, deep red vapours are formed. Which of the following statement is false?

(1) The vapours contain CrO₂Cl₂ only.
(2) The vapours give a yellow solution with NaOH.
(3) The vapours when passed into lead acetate in acetic acid gives a yellow precipitate.
(4) The vapours contain CrO₂Cl₂ and Cl₂.

24. Which of the following statement is wrong?

(1) Mn³⁺ and Co³⁺ are oxidizing agents in aqueous solution.
(2) In highest oxidation states, the transition metals show acidic character.
(3) All elements of 3d series exhibit variable oxidation states.
(4) Metals in highest oxidation states are more stable as oxides than as fluorides.


25. Which among the following is the strongest ligand?
(1) NH₃
(2) CN⁻
(3) en
(4) CO

26. Which of the following is a network crystalline solid?
(1) AlN
(2) I₂
(3) Ice
(4) NaCl

27. The number of atoms in 2.4 g of body centred cubic crystal with edge length 200 pm is

(density = 10 g cm⁻³, NA = 6 × 10²³ atoms/mol)

(1) 6 × 10²⁰
(2) 6 × 10²²
(3) 6 × 10¹⁹
(4) 6 × 10²³

28. 1 mole of NaCl is doped with 10⁻⁵ mole of SrCl₂. The number of cationic vacancies in the crystal lattice will be
(1) 6.022 × 10¹⁵
(2) 6.022 × 10¹⁸
(3) 12.044 × 10²⁰
(4) 6.022 × 10²³

29. A non-volatile solute, 'A' tetramerises in water to the extent of 80%. 2.5 g of 'A' in 100 g of water, lowers the freezing point by 0.3 °C. The molar mass of 'A' in mol L⁻¹ is (Kf for water = 1.86 K kg mol⁻¹)
(1) 221
(2) 62
(3) 354
(4) 155

30. Solution 'A' contains acetone dissolved in chloroform and solution 'B' contains acetone dissolved in carbon disulphide. The type of deviations from Raoult's law shown by solutions A and B respectively are
(1) positive and negative
(2) positive and positive
(3) negative and positive
(4) negative and negative

31. The mass of AgCl precipitated when a solution containing 11.70 g of NaCl is added to a solution containing 3.4 g of AgNO₃ is

[Atomic mass of Ag = 108, Atomic mass of Na = 23]

(1) 1.17 g
(2) 5.74 g
(3) 6.8 g
(4) 2.87 g


32. Two particles A and B are in motion. If the wavelength associated with 'A' is 33.33 nm, the wavelength associated with 'B' whose momentum is 4/3 of 'A' is:

(1) 2.5 × 10⁻⁸ m
(2) 1.0 × 10⁻⁸ m
(3) 1.0 × 10⁻⁷ m
(4) 1.25 × 10⁻⁷ m

33. The first ionization enthalpy of the following elements are in the order:

(1) P < Si < N < C
(2) C < N < Si < P
(3) Si < P < C < N
(4) P < Si < C < N

34. Solubility of AgCl is least in:

(1) Pure water
(2) 0.1 M NaCl
(3) 0.1 M AlCl₃
(4) 0.1 M BaCl₂

35. Which of the following equations does NOT represent Charles's law for a given mass of gas at constant pressure?

(1) log V = log K + log T
(2) V/T = K
(3) d(ln V)/dT = 1/T
(4) log K = log V + log T

36. Which is the most suitable reagent for the following conversion?

$$CH_3 - CH = CH - CH_2 - \stackrel{O}{\Vert}C - CH_3 \rightarrow CH_3 - CH = CH - CH_2 - \stackrel{O}{\Vert}C - OH$$

(1) I₂ and NaOH solution
(2) Tollen's reagent
(3) Sn and NaOH solution
(4) Benzoyl peroxide

37. Which of the following is least soluble in water at 298 K?

(1) (CH₃)₃N
(2) CH₃NH₂
(3) C₂H₅NH₂
(4) (CH₃)₂NH

38. If Aniline is treated with 1 : 1 mixture of con. HNO₃ and con. H₂SO₄, p-nitroaniline and m-nitroaniline are formed nearly in equal amounts. This is due to:

(1) protonation of -NH₂ which causes deactivation of benzene ring
(2) m-directing property of -NH₂ group
(3) isomerization of some p-nitroaniline into m-nitroaniline
(4) m & p directing property of -NH₂ group


39. In nucleic acids, the nucleotides are joined together by
(1) Phosphodiester linkage
(2) Phosphoester linkage
(3) Sulphodiester linkage
(4) Phosphodisulphide linkage

40. Which of the following is generally water insoluble ?
(1) Vitamin-C
(2) Fibrous protein
(3) Glycine
(4) Amylose

41. Relative lowering of vapour pressure of a dilute solution of glucose dissolved in 1 kg of water is 0.002. The molality of the solution is
(1) 0.222
(2) 0.004
(3) 0.021
(4) 0.111

42. One litre solution of MgCl₂ is electrolyzed completely by passing a current of 1A for 16 min 5 sec. The original concentration of MgCl₂ solution was
(Atomic mass of Mg = 24)
(1) 5 × 10⁻² M
(2) 5 × 10⁻³ M
(3) 1.0 × 10⁻² M
(4) 0.5 × 10⁻³ M

43. An aqueous solution of CuSO₄ is subjected to electrolysis using inert electrodes. The pH of the solution will
(1) remains unchanged
(2) increase
(3) increase or decrease depending on the strength of the current
(4) decrease

44. Give : E°₍Cu²⁺/Cu⁾ = 0.34 V and E°₍Ag⁺/Ag⁾ = 0.80 V, then E°₍Cu²⁺/Ag⁾ is
(1) 0.1 V
(2) 0.3 V
(3) 2.1 V
(4) 1.7 V

45. The plot of log V/s [R]₀ for a reaction is a straight-line parallel to x-axis. The unit for the rate constant of this reaction is
(1) mol L⁻¹ s⁻¹
(2) mol L⁻¹ s
(3) s⁻¹
(4) L mol⁻¹ s⁻¹

46. The metal nitrate that liberates NO₂ on heating
(1) LiNO₃
(2) NaNO₃
(3) RbNO₃
(4) KNO₃


47. Which of the following is NOT true regarding the usage of hydrogen as a fuel?

(1) The combustible energy of hydrogen can be directly converted to electrical energy in a fuel cell.
(2) High calorific value
(3) Hydrogen gas can be easily liquefied and stored.
(4) Combustion product is ecofriendly.

48. Resonance effect is not observed in

(1) CH₂ = CH - C ≡ N
(2) CH₂ = CH - CH = CH₂
(3) CH₂ = CH - CH₂ - NH₂
(4) CH₂ = CH - Cl

49. 2-butyne is reduced to trans-but-2-ene using

(1) Na in liq. NH₃
(2) H₂ | Ni
(3) Zn in dil. HCl
(4) H₂ | Pd - C

50. Eutrophication causes:

(1) reduction in water pollution
(2) increase of nutrients in water
(3) decrease BOD
(4) reduction in dissolved oxygen

51. Addition of excess of AgNO₃ to an aqueous solution of 1 mole of PdCl₂ · 4NH₃ gives 2 moles of AgCl. The conductivity of this solution corresponds to

(1) 1 : 3 electrolyte
(2) 1 : 1 electrolyte
(3) 1 : 4 electrolyte
(4) 1 : 2 electrolyte

52. The formula of penta aquanitrito chromium (III) nitrate is:

(1) [Cr(H₂O)₅(NO₂)]²⁺(NO₃)₂
(2) Cr(H₂O)₅₃
(3) [Cr(H₂O)₅NO₂]NO₃
(4) Cr(H₂O)₅(NO₃)₂


53. Which of the following halide undergoes hydrolysis on warming with water/aqueous NaOH?

(1)
```
Cl
|
NO₂
|
⎯
NO₂
```

(2)
```
Cl
|
⎯
```

(3)
```
NO₂ Cl NO₂
\  |  /
\ | /
⎯
|
NO₂
```

(4)
```
Cl
|
⎯
|
NO₂
```

54. The compound having longest C—Cl bond is

(1)
```
Cl
/ \
|   |
\ /
```

(2)
```
Cl
|
⎯
```

(3) CH₃ - CH = Cl

(4)
```
Cl
|
⎯
|
NO₂
```

55. The alkyl halides required to prepare $$\ce{CH3-CH(CH3)-CH2-CH2-CH3}$$ by Wurtz reaction are:

(1) $$\ce{CH3-CH(CH3)-Cl}$$ and $$\ce{CH3-CH2-Cl}$$

(2) $$\ce{CH3-CH2-CH2-Cl}$$ and $$\ce{CH3-CH2-Cl}$$

(3) $$\ce{CH3-Cl}$$ and $$\ce{CH3-CH2-Cl}$$

(4) $$\ce{CH3-CH(CH3)-Cl}$$ and $$\ce{CH3-CH2-CH2-Cl}$$


56. Which is a wrong statement ?

(1) e^(-Ea/RT) gives the fraction of reactant molecules that are activated at the given temp

(2) Rate constant k = Arrhenius constant A : if Ea = 0

(3) presence of catalyst will not alter the value of Ea

(4) ln k vs 1/T plot is a straight line.

57. 1 L of 2 M CH₃COOH is mixed with 1 L of 3M C₂H₅OH to form an ester. The rate of the reaction with respect to the initial rate when each solution is diluted with an equal volume of water will be

(1) 2 times

(2) 0.25 times

(3) 4 times

(4) 0.5 times

58. Which of the following is an example of homogeneous catalysis ?

(1) oxidation of SO₂ in contact process

(2) oxidation of NH₃ in Ostwald's process

(3) manufacture of NH₃ by Haber's process

(4) oxidation of SO₂ in lead chamber process

59. Critical Micelle concentration for a soap solution is 1.5 × 10⁻⁴ mol L⁻¹. Micelle formation is possible only when the concentration of soap solution in mol L⁻¹ is

(1) 4.6 × 10⁻⁵

(2) 2.0 × 10⁻³

(3) 1.1 × 10⁻⁴

(4) 7.5 × 10⁻⁴

60. Oxidation state of copper is +1 in

(1) Cuprite

(2) Malachite

(3) Chalcopyrite

(4) Azurite

