1. A pair of compounds having the same boiling points are
(1) cis but-2-ene and trans but-2-ene
(2) n-hexane and neo-hexane
(3) benzene and naphthalene
(4) (+) butan – 2 – ol and (–) butan –2-ol

2. Identify A, B and C in the sequence :

$$CH_3CH_2Br \xrightarrow[alc]{KCN} A \xrightarrow{LiAlH_4} B \xrightarrow[0°C]{HNO_2} C$$

(1) CH₃CH₂CN, CH₃CH₂CH₂NH₂, CH₃CH₂CH₂OH
(2) CH₃CH₂NC, CH₃CH₂OH, CH₃CH₂CH₂NH₂
(3) CH₃CH₂CN, C₂H₅OH, C₂H₅N₂Cl
(4) CH₃CH₂CN, CH₃CH₂NH₂, C₂H₅OH

3. 
$$CH_3 - CH = CH - CH_2OH \xrightarrow{PCC} CH_3 - CH = CH - CHO$$
Hybridisation change involved at C–1 in the above reaction
(1) sp³ to sp     
(2) sp³ to sp²     
(3) sp² to sp³     
(4) sp to sp²

4. If a didentate ligand ethane –1, 2 – diamine is progressively added in the molar ratio en : Ni :: 1 : 1, 2 : 1, 3 : 1 to [Ni(H₂O)₆]²⁺ aq solution, following co-ordination entities are
formed.
I.   [Ni(H₂O)₄(en)]²⁺₍ₐq₎ – pale blue
II.  [Ni(H₂O)₂(en)₂]²⁺₍ₐq₎ – blue/purple
III. [Ni (en)₃]²⁺₍ₐq₎ – violet

The wavelength in nm of light absorbed in case of I and III are respectively
(1) 475 nm and 310 nm                
(2) 300 nm and 475 nm
(3) 310 nm and 500 nm                
(4) 600 nm and 535 nm

5. Which of the following is an organometallic compound ?
(1) CH₃COONa       
(2) CH₃CH₂MgBr     
(3) (CH₃COO)₂Ca      
(4) CH₃ONa

6. A better reagent to oxidize primary alcohols into aldehyde is :
(1) PCC
(2) Alkaline KMnO₄
(3) Acidified K₂Cr₂O₇
(4) CrO₃

7. In the reaction :
C₆H₅CN $\xrightarrow{\text{(i) SnCl₂ + HCl}}{\text{(ii) H₃O⁺}}$ X $\xrightarrow{\text{con.KOH}}$ Y + Z,

Formation of X, formation of Y and Z are known by
(1) Rosenmund reduction, Cannizaro reaction.
(2) Clemmensen reduction, Sandmeyer reaction.
(3) Wolff-Kishner reduction, Wurtz reaction.
(4) Stephen reaction, Cannizaro reaction.

8. Compounds P and R in the following reaction are
CH₃CHO $\xrightarrow{\text{(i) CH₃ MgBr}}{\text{(ii) H₃O⁺}}$ P $\xrightarrow{\text{conc.H₂SO₄}}{\text{heat}}$ Q $\xrightarrow{\text{(i)B₂H₆}}{\text{(ii)H₂O₂,OH⁻}}$ R

(1) Position isomers
(2) Functional isomers
(3) Metamers
(4) Identical

9. Aniline does not undergo
(1) Nitration
(2) Sulphonation
(3) Friedel-Craft reaction
(4) Bromination

10. The heating of phenyl methyl ether with HI produces an aromatic compound A which on treatment with con. HNO₃ gives B. A and B respectively are,
(1) Methanol, Ethanoic acid
(2) Picric acid, Phenol
(3) Iodobenzene, 1-Iodo-4-nitrobenzene
(4) Phenol, Picric acid

11. 
```mermaid
graph LR
A[OH] -- NaOH --> B["A (i) CO₂ (ii) H⁺"] --> C["B (i)(CH₃CO)₂O (ii) H⁺"] --> D["Y (Major product)"]
```

Y in the above reaction is
(1) Salicylaldehyde
(2) Aspirin
(3) Cumene
(4) Picric acid


12. Sucrose is dextrorotatory but after hydrolysis the mixture show laevorotation, this is because of

(1) Laevorotation of glucose is more than dextrorotation of fructose.
(2) Sucrose is a non-reducing sugar.
(3) Racemic mixture is formed.
(4) Laevorotation of fructose is more than dextrorotation of glucose.

13. The correct order of match between column X and column Y is:

| X              | Y                                 |
| -------------- | --------------------------------- |
| I. Vitamin A   | i. Muscular weakness              |
| II. Vitamin D  | ii. Increased blood clotting time |
| III. Vitamin E | iii. Night-blindness              |
| IV. Vitamin K  | iv. Osteomalacia                  |

(1) I - iv, II - iii, III - ii, IV - i
(2) I - ii, II - i, III - iii, IV - iv
(3) I - iii, II - ii, III - iv, IV - i
(4) I - iii, II - iv, III - i, IV - ii

14. In the reaction:

```
NH2 --P--> N2Cl+ --Q--> N2BF4- --R--> NO2
```

P, Q and R respectively are:

(1) NaNO2 + dil. HCl, HBF4, Cu + NaNO2
(2) NaNO2 + con.HCl, F2, Cu + NaNO3
(3) NaNO2 + dil.HCl, BF3, Cu + NaNO2
(4) NaNO3 + dil. HCl, F2, Cu + NaNO3

15. Thyroxine produced in the thyroid gland is an iodinated derivative of ________.

(1) threonine
(2) lysine
(3) tyrosine
(4) tryptophan


16. Which one of the following is a non-narcotic analgesic ?
(1) Heroin    
(2) Codeine    
(3) Aspirin    
(4) Morphine

17. Receptors are proteins and crucial to body communication process. These receptors are embedded in
(1) Cell membrane    
(2) Protein    
(3) Endocrine gland    
(4) Chromosomes

18. Which of the following monomers form biodegradable polymers ?
(1) Ethylene glycol and pthalic acid
(2) Caprolactum and 1, 3 – Butadiene
(3) Phenol and formaldehyde
(4) 3-hydroxybutanoic acid and 3-hydroxypentanoic acid

19. Match the List-I with List-II in the following :

| List-I            | List-II                         | |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------- |---|
| 1. Caprolactum    | (1) -(CH2-CH)-<br/>\|<br/>CH3   |
| 2. Vinyl chloride | (2) -(CH2-CH)-<br/>\|<br/>C6H5  |
| 3. Styrene        | (3) -(CH2-CH)-<br/>\|<br/>Cl    |
| 4. Propene        | (4) -( C-(CH2)5N)-<br/>\|<br/>H |

(1) 1-c, 2-d, 3-a, 4-b
(2) 1-a, 2-d, 3-c, 4-b
(3) 1-d, 2-c, 3-a, 4-b
(4) 1-d, 2-c, 3-b, 4-a


20. The correct order of first ionisation enthalpy of given elements is
(1) Li < B < Be < C   
(2) Be < Li < B < C   
(3) C < B < Be < Li   
(4) Li < Be < B < C

21. Which of the following statement is INCORRECT ?
(1) Bond length of O₂ > Bond length of O₂²⁺   
(2) Bond order of O₂⁺ < Bond order of O₂²⁻
(3) Bond length of O₂ < Bond length of O₂²⁻   
(4) Bond order of O₂ > Bond order of O₂²⁻

22. A gas at a pressure of 2 atm is heated from 25 °C to 323 °C and simultaneously compressed to ²/₃ of its original value. Then the final pressure is
(1) 1.33 atm   
(2) 6 atm   
(3) 2 atm   
(4) 4 atm

23. Lattice enthalpy for NaCl is + 788 kJ mol⁻¹ and ΔH°ₕₕₕ = -784 kJ mol⁻¹. Enthalpy of solution of NaCl is
(1) + 572 kJ mol⁻¹   
(2) + 4 kJ mol⁻¹   
(3) -572 kJ mol⁻¹   
(4) - 4 kJ mol⁻¹

24. At 500 K, for a reversible reaction A₂(g) + B₂(g) ⇌ 2AB(g) in a closed container, Kc = 2 × 10⁻⁵. In the presence of catalyst, the equilibrium is attaining 10 times faster. The equilibrium constant Kc in the presence of catalyst at the same temperature is
(1) 2 × 10⁻⁴   
(2) 2 × 10⁻⁶   
(3) 2 × 10⁻¹⁰   
(4) 2 × 10⁻⁵

25. A weak acid with pKa 5.9 and weak base with pKb 5.8 are mixed in equal proportions. pH of the resulting solution is
(1) 7.005   
(2) 7.5   
(3) 7   
(4) 7.05

26. Temperature of 25 °C in Fahrenheit and Kelvin scale respectively are
(1) 77 °F and 298.15 K   
(2) 17 °F and 298.15 K
(3) 45 °F and 260.15 K   
(4) 47 °F and 312.15 K

27. The number of protons, neutrons and electrons in the ion ₁₆S²⁻ respectively are
(1) 16, 18, 16   
(2) 16, 16, 18   
(3) 18, 16, 16   
(4) 16, 16, 16


28. A pair of amphoteric oxides is
(1) Al₂O₃, Li₂O   
(2) BeO, BO₃   
(3) BeO, MgO   
(4) BeO, ZnO

29. The composition of water gas is
(1) CO(g) + N₂(g)   
(2) CH₄(g)   
(3) CO(g) + H₂O(g)   
(4) CO(g) + H₂(g)

30. IUPAC name of the compound is

```
H₃C     CH₃
\     /
C = C
/     \
H₃C       CH₃
```

(1) 2, 3 – dimethylbut-2-ene
(2) 2, 3 – dimethyl butyne
(3) 1, 1, 2, 2 – tetra methylethene
(4) 2, 3 – dimethyl butene

31. Among the following :

```
I     II    III   IV    V    VI
```

The set which represents aromatic species is
(1) I, II and III   
(2) III, IV and V   
(3) II and III   
(4) I, II and IV

32. Which one of the following gases converts haemoglobin into carboxy haemoglobin ?
(1) CO   
(2) O₂   
(3) NO   
(4) CO₂

33. What is the oxidation number of S in H₂S₂O₈ ?
(1) +5   
(2) +4   
(3) +7   
(4) +6

34. A 30% solution of hydrogen peroxide is
(1) '30 volume' hydrogen peroxide   
(2) '10 volume' hydrogen peroxide
(3) '50 volume' hydrogen peroxide   
(4) '100 volume' hydrogen peroxide


35. If 'a' stands for the edge length of the cubic systems - The ratio of radii in simple cubic, body centered cubic and face centered cubic unit cells is

(1) 1a : √3 a : √2a
(2) 1/2 a : √3/4 a : 1/2√2 a
(3) 1/2 a : √3/2 a : √2/2 a
(4) 1/2 a : √3 a : 1/√2 a

36. Dimerisation of solute molecules in low dielectric constant solvent is due to :
(1) Hydrogen bond
(2) Covalent bond
(3) Co-ordinate bond
(4) Ionic bond

37. The swelling in feet and ankles of an aged person due to sitting continuously for long hours during travel, is reduced by soaking the feet in warm salt water. This is because of :
(1) Reverse Osmosis
(2) Osmosis
(3) Edema
(4) Diffusion

38. A sample of water is found to contain 5.85% (w/w) of AB (molecular mass 58.5) and 9.50% (w/w) XY₂ (molecular mass 95). Assuming 80% ionisation of AB and 60% ionisation of XY₂, the freezing point of water sample is [Given : Kf for water 1.86 K kg mol⁻¹, Freezing point of pure water is 273 K and A, B and Y are monovalent ions]
(1) 264.25 K
(2) 265.56 K
(3) 280.44 K
(4) 281.75 K

39. Match the column A (type of crystalline solid) with the column B (example for each type) :

| A                  | B        |
| ------------------ | -------- |
| P. Molecular Solid | i. SiC   |
| Q. Ionic Solid     | ii. Mg   |
| R. Metallic Solid  | iii. H₂O |
| S. Network Solid   | iv. MgO  |

(1) P-iii, Q-i, R-ii, S-iv
(2) P-iv, Q-iii, R-ii, S-i
(3) P-ii, Q-iv, R-iii, S-i
(4) P-iii, Q-iv, R-ii, S-i

40. A metal crystallises in a body centered cubic lattice with the metallic radius √3 Å. The volume of the unit cell in m³ is
(1) 64 × 10⁻²⁹
(2) 4 × 10⁻²⁹
(3) 6.4 × 10⁻²⁹
(4) 4 × 10⁻¹⁰


41. The resistance of 0.1 M weak acid HA in a conductivity cell is 2 × 10³ Ohm. The cell constant of the cell is 0.78 C m⁻¹ and λ°ₘ of acid HA is 390 S cm² mol⁻¹. The pH of the solution is
(1) 3.3
(2) 4.2
(3) 5
(4) 3

42. In which one of the following reactions, rate constant has the unit mol L⁻¹ s⁻¹?
(1) Acid catalysed hydrolysis of CH₃COOCH₃
(2) CHCl₃ + Cl₂ ——→ CCl₄ + HCl
(3) 2NO(g) + O₂(g) ——→ 2NO₂(g)
(4) Decomposition of HI on the surface of Gold

43. For a reaction, the value of rate constant at 300 K is 6.0 × 10⁵ s⁻¹. The value of Arrhenius factor A at infinitely high temperature is:
(1) 6 × 10⁵ × e⁻ᴱᵃ/³⁰⁰ᴿ
(2) e⁻ᴱᵃ/³⁰⁰ᴿ
(3) 6 × 10⁻⁵ / 300
(4) 6 × 10⁵

44. The rate constants k₁ and k₂ for two different reactions are 10¹⁶ × e⁻²⁰⁰⁰/ᵀ and 10¹⁵ × e⁻¹⁰⁰⁰/ᵀ respectively. The temperature at which k₁ = k₂ is:
(1) 2000 / 2.303 K
(2) 2000 K
(3) 1000 / 2.303 K
(4) 1000 K

45. During the electrolysis of brine, by using inert electrodes,
(1) O₂ liberates at anode
(2) H₂ liberates at anode
(3) Na deposits on cathode
(4) Cl₂ liberates at anode

46. Consider the following 4 electrodes
A : Ag⁺ (0.0001 M)/Ag(s) ; B : Ag⁺ (0.1 M) / Ag(s)
C : Ag⁺ (0.01 M)/Ag(s) ; D : Ag⁺ (0.001 M) / Ag(s) ; E°Ag⁺/Ag = +0.80 V
Then reduction potential in volts of the electrodes in the order
(1) B > C > D > A
(2) C > D > A > B
(3) A > D > C > B
(4) A > B > C > D


47. When FeCl₃ is added to excess of hot water gives a sol 'X'. When FeCl₃ is added to NaOH(aq) solution, gives sol 'Y'.

X and Y formed in the above processes respectively are
(1) Fe₂O₃ · xH₂O / OH⁻ and Fe₂O₃ · xH₂O/Fe³⁺
(2) Fe₂O₃ · xH₂O / H⁺ and Fe₂O₃ · xH₂O/Na⁺
(3) Fe₂O₃ · xH₂O / Cl⁻ and Fe₂O₃ · xH₂O/OH⁻
(4) Fe₂O₃ · xH₂O / Fe³⁺ and Fe₂O₃ · xH₂O/OH⁻

48. The reducing agent in the given equations:

$$4 Ag⁺_{(s)} + 8 CN⁻_{(aq)} + 2H₂O_{(aq)} + O₂⁻_{(g)} \longrightarrow 4[Ag(CN)₂]⁻_{(aq)} + 4 OH⁻_{(aq)}$$

$$2[Ag(CN)₂]⁻_{(aq)} + Zn_{(s)} \longrightarrow [Zn(CN)₄]²⁻_{(aq)} + 2Ag_{(s)}$$

(1) Zn
(2) O₂
(3) H₂O
(4) CN⁻

49. For the formation of which compound in Ellingham diagram ΔG° becomes more and more negative with increase in temperature?
(1) CO
(2) FeO
(3) ZnO
(4) Cu₂O

50. Which of the following compound does not give dinitrogen on heating?
(1) Ba(N₃)₂
(2) NH₄NO₂
(3) NH₄NO₃
(4) (NH₄)₂ Cr₂O₇

51. Aqueous solution of raw sugar when passed over beds of animal charcoal, it becomes colourless. Pick the correct set of terminologies that can be used for the above example.

| Adsorbent               | Adsorbate           | Process    |
| ----------------------- | ------------------- | ---------- |
| (1) Solution of Sugar   | Animal Charcoal     | Sorption   |
| (2) Animal Charcoal     | Solution of Sugar   | Absorption |
| (3) Animal Charcoal     | Colouring substance | Adsorption |
| (4) Colouring Substance | Animal Charcoal     | Adsorption |

52. For Freundlich adsorption isotherm, a graph of log (x/m) Vs. log (P) gives a straight line. The slope of line and its Y-axis intercept respectively are

(1) log (1/n), K
(2) 1/n, log K
(3) log (1/n), log K
(4) 1/n, K

53. In solid state, PCl5 is a/an
(1) Octahedral structure
(2) Ionic solid with [PCl6]+ and [PCl4]-
(3) Ionic solid with [PCl4]+ and [PCl6]-
(4) Covalent solid present in the form of P2Cl10

54. In which one of the following pairs, both the elements does not have (n-1)d10ns2 configuration in its elementary state ?
(1) Zn, Cd
(2) Cd, Hg
(3) Hg, Cn
(4) Cu, Zn

55. Which of the following is CORRECT with respect to melting point of a transition element ?
(1) V > Cr
(2) Cr > Mn
(3) Mn > Fe
(4) Ti > V

56. aMnO4- + bS2O32- + H2O ——> xMnO2 + ySO42- + zOH-
a and y respectively are
(1) 8; 3
(2) 8; 6
(3) 3; 6
(4) 8; 8

57. Which formula and name combination is INCORRECT ?
(1) K3[Al(C2O4)3] – Potassium trioxalatoaluminate (III)
(2) [Pt(NH3)2 Cl(NO2)] – Diamminechloridonitrito – N – platinum (II)
(3) [CoCl2(en)2]Cl – Dichloridodiethylenediammine cobalt (II) chloride
(4) [Co(NH3)4 (H2O)Cl]Cl2 – Tetraammineaquachloridocobalt (III) chloride

58. Which of the following system in an octahedral complex has maximum unpaired electrons ?
(1) d9 (high spin)
(2) d6 (low spin)
(3) d4 (low spin)
(4) d7 (high spin)

59. The correct decreasing order of basicity of hydrides of Group-15 elements is
(1) SbH3 > AsH3 > PH3 > NH3
(2) PH3 > AsH3 > SbH3 > NH3
(3) AsH3 > SbH3 > NH3 > PH3
(4) NH3 > PH3 > AsH3 > SbH3

60. Which one of the following oxoacids of phosphorus can reduce AgNO3 to metallic silver ?
(1) H3PO2
(2) H4P2O7
(3) H4P2O6
(4) H3PO4
