
1. 1.0 g of Mg is burnt with 0.28 g of O₂ in a closed vessel. Which reactant is left in excess and how much?
(1) Mg.5.8 g
(2) Mg.0.58 g
(3) O₂, 0.24 g
(4) O₂, 2.4 g

2. The orbital nearest to the nucleus is
(1) 4f
(2) 5d
(3) 4s
(4) 7p

3. Which of the following is the correct order of radius?
(1) H⁻ > H > H⁺
(2) Na⁺ > F⁻ > O²⁻
(3) F⁻ > O²⁻ > Na⁺
(4) Al³⁺ > Mg²⁺ > N³⁻

4. The intramolecular hydrogen bond is present in
(1) Phenol
(2) α-Nitrophenol
(3) p-Nitrophenol
(4) p-Cresol

5. The state of hybrid orbitals of carbon in CO₂, CH₄ and CO₃²⁻ respectively is
(1) sp³, sp² and sp
(2) sp³, sp and sp²
(3) sp, sp³ and sp²
(4) sp², sp³ and sp

6. For an ideal gas, compressibility factor is
(1) 0
(2) 1
(3) -1
(4) +2

7. The relationship between KP and KC IS
KP = KC(RT)Δn. What would be the value of Δn for the reaction NH₄Cl(s) ⇌ NH₃(g) + HCl(g)?
(1) 1
(2) 0.5
(3) 1.5
(4) 2

8. Acidity of BF₃ can be explained on which of the following concepts?
(1) Arrhenius concept
(2) Bronsted – Lowery concept
(3) Lewis concept
(4) Bronsted – Lowry as well as Lewis concept

9. For the redox reaction
xMnO₄⁻ + yH₂C₂O₄ + zH⁺ → mMn²⁺ + nCO₂ + pH₂O
The values of x, y, m and n are
(1) 10, 2, 5, 2
(2) 2, 5, 2, 10
(3) 6, 4, 2, 5
(4) 3, 5, 2, 10

10. H₂O₂ is
(1) An oxidizing agent
(2) A reducing agent
(3) Both oxidising and reducing agent
(4) Neither oxidizing nor reducing agent

11. Dead burnt plaster is
(1) CaSO₄
(2) CaSO₄·½H₂O
(3) CaSO₄·H₂O
(4) CaSO₄·2H₂O

12. Identify the following compound which exhibits geometrical isomerism:
(1) But – 2 – ene
(2) But – 1 – ene
(3) Butane
(4) Isobutane

13. During the fusion of organic compound with sodium metal, nitrogen present in the organic compound is converted into
(1) NaNO₂
(2) NaNH₂
(3) NaCN
(4) NaNC

14. The reagent 'X' used for the following reaction is

```
R-C≡CR' + H₂ --X--> R\       /R'
C = C
/       \H
H
```

(1) Ni
(2) Pd/C
(3) LiAlH₄
(4) Na/Liquid NH₃

15. Which of the following ions will causes hardness in water?
(1) Ca²⁺
(2) Na⁺
(3) Cl⁻
(4) K⁺

16. Which of the following oxides shows electrical properties like metals?
(1) SiO₂
(2) MgO
(3) SO₂(s)
(4) CrO₂



17. Which of the following aqueous solution should have the highest boiling point?
(1) 1.0 M NaOH
(2) 1.0 M Na₂SO₄
(3) 1.0 M NH₄NO₃
(4) 1.0 M KNO₃

18. The charge required for the reduction of 1 mole of MnO₄⁻ to MnO₂ is
(1) 1 F
(2) 3 F
(3) 5 F
(4) 7 F

19. For the reaction,
2SO₂ + O₂ ⇌ 2SO₃
The rate of disappearance of O₂ is 2×10⁻⁴ mol L⁻¹s⁻¹. The rate of appearance of SO₃ is
(1) 2×10⁻⁴ mol L⁻¹s⁻¹
(2) 4×10⁻⁴ mol L⁻¹s⁻¹
(3) 1×10⁻⁴ mol L⁻¹s⁻¹
(4) 6×10⁻⁴ mol L⁻¹s⁻¹

20. Which of the following electrolytes will have maximum coagulating value for AgI/Ag⁺ sol?
(1) Na₂S
(2) Na₃PO₄
(3) Na₂SO₄
(4) NaCl

21. Electrolytic refining is used to purify which of the following metals?
(1) Cu and Zn
(2) Ge and Si
(3) Zr and Ti
(4) Zn and Hg

22. Dry ice is
(1) Solid CO
(2) Solid SO₂
(3) Solid CO₂
(4) Solid O₂

23. Which of the following is an amphoteric oxide?
(1) V₂O₅, Cr₂O₃
(2) Mn₂O₇, Cr₂O₃
(3) CrO, V₂O₅
(4) V₂O₅V₂O₄

24. The IUPAC name of [Co(NH₃)₄Cl(NO₂)]Cl is
(1) Tetraamminechloridonitrito – N – cobalt (III) chloride
(2) Tetraamminechloridonitrocobalt (II) chloride
(3) Tetraamminechloridonitrocobalt (I) chloride
(4) Tetraamminechloridodinitrocobalt (III) chloride

25. Which of the following statements is true in case of alkyl halides?
(1) They are polar in nature
(2) They can form hydrogen bonds
(3) They are highly soluble in water
(4) They undergo addition reactions

26. Phenol can be distinguished from ethanol by the reagent
(1) Bromine water
(2) Sodium metal
(3) Iron metal
(4) Chlorine water

27. Which of the following compounds undergoes haloform reaction?
(1) CH₃COCH₃
(2) HCHO
(3) CH₃CH₂Br
(4) C₆H₅CH₂N₂⁺X⁻

28. Which of the following will be the most stable diazonium salt (RN₂⁺X⁻)?
(1) CH₃N₂⁺X⁻
(2) C₆H₅N₂⁺X⁻
(3) CH₃CH₂N₂⁺X⁻
(4) C₆H₅CH₂N₂⁺X⁻

29. Which of the following bases is not present in DNA?
(1) Adenine
(2) Guanine
(3) Cytosine
(4) Uracil

30. Which one of the following is a polyamide polymer?
(1) Terylene
(2) Nylon – 6, 6
(3) Buna – S
(4) Bakelite

31. In F.C.C the cell is shared equally by how many unit cells?
(1) 10
(2) 8
(3) 6
(4) 2

32. At a particular temperature, the ratio of molar conductance to specific conductance of 0.01 M NaCl solution is
(1) 10⁵ cm³ mol⁻¹
(2) 10³ cm³ mol⁻¹
(3) 10 cm³ mol⁻¹
(4) 10⁵ cm² mol⁻¹

33. Isotonic solutions are solutions having the same
(1) Surface tension
(2) Vapour pressure
(3) Osmotic pressure
(4) Viscosity


34. The temperature co efficient of a reaction is 2. When the temperature is increased from 30°C to 90°C, the rate of reaction is increased by
(1) 150 times          
(2) 410 times
(3) 72 times           
(4) 64 times

35. Gold sol is not a
(1) Lyophobic sol
(2) Negatively charged sol
(3) Macromolecular sol
(4) Multimolecular sol

36. The common impurity present in bauxite is
(1) CuO                
(2) ZnO
(3) Fe₂O₃              
(4) Cr₂O₃

37. Very pure N₂ can be obtained by
(1) Thermal decomposition of ammonium dichromate
(2) Treating aqueous solution of NH₄Cl and NaNO₂
(3) Liquefaction and fractional distillation of liquid air Midbrain
(4) Thermal decomposition of sodium azide

38. Which of the following oxidation states is common for all lanthanides?
(1) +2                 
(2) +3
(3) +4                 
(4) +5

39. The electronic configuration of transition element "X" is +3, oxidation state is [Ar]3d⁵, what is its atomic number?
(1) 25                 
(2) 26
(3) 27                 
(4) 24

40. n – Propyl chloride reacts with sodium metal in dry ether to give
(1) CH₃ – CH₂ – CH₂ – CH₂ – CH₂ – CH₃
(2) CH₃ – CH₂ – CH₃
(3) CH₃ – CH₂ – CH₂ – CH₃
(4) CH₃ – CH₂ – CH₂ – CH₂ – CH₂ – CH₂ – CH₃

41. When the vapours of tertiary butyl alcohol are passed through heated copper at 573 K, the product formed is
(1) But – 2 – ene      (2) 2 – Butanone
(3) 2 – Methyl propene (4) Butanal

42. What is the increasing order of acidic strength among the following?
i. p – methoxy phenol
ii. p – methyl phenol
iii. p – nitro phenol
(1) ii < iii < i        
(2) iii < ii < i
(3) i < ii < iii        
(4) i < iii < ii

43. Which of the following is more basic than aniline?
(1) Diphenylamine       
(2) Triphenylamine
(3) p – Nitroaniline    
(4) Benzylamine

44. The two forms of D – Glucopyranose are called
(1) Diastereomers       
(2) Anomers
(3) Epimers             
(4) enantiomers

45. Among the following, the branched chain polymer is
(1) Polyvinyl chloride  
(2) Bakelite
(3) Low density polythene
(4) High density polythene

46. Edge length of a cube is 300 pm. Its body diagonal would be
(1) 600 pm              
(2) 423 pm
(3) 519.6 pm            
(4) 450.5 pm

47. Which of the following is not a conductor of electricity?
(1) Solid NaCl          
(2) Cu
(3) Fused NaCl          
(4) Brine solution

48. For a cell reaction involving two electron changes, E°cell = 0.3 V at 25°C. The equilibrium constant of the reaction is
(1) 10⁻¹⁰               
(2) 3×10²
(3) 10                  
(4) 10¹⁰

49. The value of rate constant of a pseudo first order reaction
(1) Depends only on temperature
(2) Depends on the concentration of reactants present in small amounts
(3) Depends on the concentration of reactants present in excess
(4) Is independent of the concentration


50. (CH₃)₃SiCl is used during polymerization of organosilicons because
(1) The chain length of organosilicon polymers can be controlled by adding (CH₃)SiCl
(2) (CH₃)₃SiCl does not block the end terminal of silicone polymer
(3) (CH₃)₃SiCl does not block end terminal of silicone polymer
(4) (CH₃)₃SiCl acts as a catalyst during polymerisation

51. When PbO₂ reacts with concentrated HNO₃ the gas evolved is
(1) NO₂
(2) O₂
(3) N₂
(4) N₂O

52. KMnO₄ acts as an oxidizing agent in alkaline medium. When alkaline KMnO₄ is treated with KI, iodide ion is oxidized is
(1) I₂
(2) IO⁻
(3) IO₃⁻
(4) IO₄⁻

53. [Fe(NO₃)₃Cl₃] and [Fe(O−NO)₃Cl₃] shows
(1) Linkage isomerism
(2) Geometrical isomerism
(3) Optical isomerism
(4) Hydrate isomerism

54. Tertiary alkyl halide is practically inert to substitution by SN₂ mechanism because of
(1) Insolubility
(2) Instability
(3) Inductive effect
(4) Steric hindrance

55. The products X and z in the following reaction sequence are

```
+ CH₃-CH=CH₂ --AlCl₃/ether--> X
Heat

O₂/130°C --> Y --H⁺/H₂O--> OH + Z
Heat
```

(1) Isopropyl benzene and acetone
(2) Cumene peroxide and acetone
(3) Isopropyl benzene and isopropyl alcohol
(4) Phenol and acetone

56. The appropriate reagent for the following transformation is

```
O
||
CH₃ -->     CH₃
HO          HO
```

(1) Zn − Hg/HCl
(2) H₂N−NH₂, KOH/ethylene glycol
(3) N₂/H₂
(4) NaBH₄

57. In the following reaction
```
CH₃
|
--CrO₂Cl₂--> X --H₃O⁺-->
CS₂
```
The compound Z is
(1) Benzoic acid
(2) Benzaldehyde
(3) Acetophenone
(4) Benzene

58. The reaction of Benzene diazonium chloride with yields yellow dye. The name of the yellow dye is
(1) p− Hydroxyazobenzene
(2) P − Aminoazobenzene
(3) P − Nitroazobenzene
(4) o − Nitroazobenzene

59. The glycosidic linkage involved in linking the glucose units in amylose part of starch is
(1) C₁−C₄β−linkage
(2) C₁−C₆α−linkage
(3) C₁−C₆β−linkage
(4) C₁−C₄α−linkage

60. Ziegler − Natta catalyst is used to prepare
(1) Low density polythene
(2) Teflon
(3) High density polythene
(4) Nylon − 6
