1. The half-life period of a 1st order reaction is 60 minutes. What percentage will be left over after 240 minutes ?
(1) 6.25%                
(2) 4.25%
(3) 5%                   
(4) 6%

2. Which of the following is not a colligative property ?

(1) Osmotic pressure     
(2) Optical activity
(3) Depression in Freezing point 
(4) Elevation in Boiling point

3. The contribution of particle at the edge centre to a particular unit cell is,

(1) $\frac{1}{2}$        
(2) $\frac{1}{4}$
(3) 1                    
(4) $\frac{1}{8}$

4. When an electrolyte is dissociated in solution, the van't Hoff's factor (i) is,

(1) >1                   
(2) <1
(3) = 0                  
(4) = 1

5. Which of the following is incorrect in a galvanic cell ?

(1) Oxidation occurs at anode.
(2) Reduction occurs at cathode.
(3) The electrode at which electrons are gained is called cathode.
(4) The electrode at which electrons are lost is called cathode.


6. A secondary cell is one

(1) can be recharged.
(2) can be recharged by passing current through it in the same direction.
(3) can be recharged by passing current through it in the opposite direction.
(4) can not recharged.

7. Osmotic pressure of the solution can be increased by,

(1) increasing the temperature of the solution.
(2) decreasing the temperature of the solution.
(3) increasing the volume of the vessel.
(4) diluting the solution.

8. The amount of current in Faraday is required for the reduction of 1 mol of Cr₂O₇²⁻ ions to Cr³⁺ is,

(1) 1 F
(2) 2 F
(3) 6 F
(4) 4 F

9. For a chemical reaction,

mA → xB, the rate law is r = k[A]².

If the concentration of A is doubled, the reaction rate will be,

(1) Doubled
(2) Quadrupled
(3) Increases by 8 times
(4) Unchanged


10. Schottky defect in a crystal is observed when,

(1) Unequal number of cations and anions are missing from the lattice.
(2) Equal number of cations and anions are missing from the lattice.
(3) An ion leaves its normal site and occupies an interstitial site.
(4) No ion is missing from its lattice site

11. 3A ——> 2B, rate of reaction + $$\frac{d[B]}{dt}$$ is equal to

(1) $$-\frac{3}{2} \frac{d[A]}{dt}$$    
(2) $$-\frac{2}{3} \frac{d[A]}{dt}$$
(3) $$+2\frac{d[A]}{dt}$$               
(4) $$-\frac{1}{3} \frac{d[A]}{dt}$$

12. The activation energy of a chemical reaction can be determined by,

(1) evaluating rate constants at two different temperatures.
(2) changing the concentration of reactants.
(3) evaluating the concentration of reactants at two different temperatures.
(4) evaluating rate constant at standard temperature.

13. Which of the following statements is incorrect w.r.t. Physisorption ?

(1) The forces involved are van der Waal's forces.
(2) More easily liquifiable gases are adsorbed easily.
(3) Under high pressure it results into Multi-molecular layer on adsorbent surface.
(4) ΔHadsorption is low and +Ve.


14. Sulphur sol contains
(1) Discrete S-atoms
(2) Discrete S-molecules
(3) Large aggregates of S-molecules
(4) Water dispersed in Solid Sulphur

15. Reactions in Zeolite catalyst depend on,
(1) Pores                
(2) Apertures
(3) Size of cavity       
(4) All of these

16. IUPAC name of the compound

```
H3C    H
\     /
C = C
/     \
H       H - Br
```

(1) 1-Bromo but-2-ene    
(2) 2-Bromo-2-butene
(3) Bromo butene         
(4) 1-Bromo but-3-ene

17. Replacement of Cl of Chlorobenzene to give phenol requires drastic conditions, but Cl of 2, 4 – dinitro chlorobenzene is readily replaced. This is because,

(1) –NO2 group makes the ring electron rich at ortho and para positions.
(2) –NO2 group withdraws electrons from meta position.
(3) –NO2 donate electrons at meta position.
(4) –NO2 withdraws electrons from ortho and para positions.


18. In the reaction :
Ethanol $$\xrightarrow{PCl_5} X \xrightarrow{\text{alc KOH}} Y \xrightarrow{\text{H}_2\text{SO}_4, \text{Room temp.}}_{\text{H}_2\text{O}, \Delta} Z$$, the product Z is,

(1) C₂H₄

(2) CH₃CH₂OCH₂CH₃

(3) CH₃CH₂OSO₃H

(4)
```
OH
/\
```

19. Which of the following compound is most acidic?

(1) Cl - CH₂ - CH₂ - OH

(2)
```
OH
/\
```

(3)
```
OH
/\
NO₂
```

(4)
```
OH
/\
CH₃
```

20. Benzene carbaldehyde is reacted with concentrated NaOH solution to give the products A and B. The product A can be used food preservative and the product B is an aromatic hydroxy compound where OH gorup is linked to sp³ hybridised carbon atom next to Benzene ring. The products A and B are respectively,

(1) Sodium benzoate and phenol

(2) Sodium benzoate and phenyl methanol

(3) Sodium benzoate and cresol

(4) Sodium benzoate and picric acid

21. The reaction which involves dichlorocarbene as an electrophile is,

(1) Reimer-Tiemann reaction   
(2) Kolbe's reaction
(3) Friedel-Craft's acylation  
(4) Fittig's reaction.


22. Ethanol is converted into ethoxy ethane,

(1) by heating excess of ethanol with conc. H₂SO₄ at 140 °C.

(2) by heating Ethanol with excess of conc. H₂SO₄ at 443 K.

(3) by treating with conc. H₂SO₄ at room temperature.

(4) by treating with conc. H₂SO₄ at 273 K.

23. An organic compound X is oxidised by using acidified K₂Cr₂O₇ solution. The product obtained reacts with phenyl hydrazine but does not answer silver mirror test. The compound X is,

(1) 2-propanol
(2) Ethanal
(3) Ethanol
(4) CH₃CH₂CH₃

24. Predict the product 'C' in the following series of reactions :

```
CH₃ - COOH --PCl₅--> A --C₆H₅---> B --CH₃MgBr--> C
Anhyd A/Cl₃
```

(1)
```
O
||
/\
```

(2) CH₃CH(OH)C₆H₅

(3) CH₃CH(OH)C₆H₅

(4) (CH₃)₂C(OH)C₆H₅

25. The number of oxygen atoms in 4.4 gm of CO₂ is,

(1) 1.2 × 10²³
(2) 6 × 10²²
(3) 6 × 10²³
(4) 12 × 10²³


26. If the bond energies of H-H, Br-Br and H-Br are 433, 192 and 364 kJ mol⁻¹ respectively, then ΔH° for the reaction :

H₂(g) + Br₂(g) → 2HBr(g) is

(1) -261 kJ       
(2) +103 kJ
(3) +261 kJ        
(4) -103 kJ

27. In the reaction; Fe(OH)₃(s) ⇌ Fe³⁺(aq) + 3OH⁻(aq), if the concentration of OH⁻ ions is decreased by 1/4 times, then the equilibrium concentration of Fe³⁺ will increase by,

(1) 8 times        
(2) 16 times
(3) 64 times       
(4) 4 times

28. The correct statement regarding entropy is,
(1) At absolute zero temperature, entropy of a perfectly crystalline solid is zero.
(2) At absolute zero temperature, the entropy of a perfectly crystalline substance is +Ve.
(3) At absolute zero temperature, the entropy of all crystalline substances is zero.
(4) At 0 °C, the entropy of a perfect crystalline solid is zero.

29. Equilibrium constants K₁ and K₂ for the following equilibria

(a) NO(g) + 1/2 O₂(g) ⇌ NO₂(g)

(b) 2NO₂(g) ⇌ 2NO(g) + O₂(g)

are related as :

(1) K₁ = √K₂        
(2) K₂ = 1/K₁
(3) K₁ = 2 K₂       
(4) K₂ = 1/K₁²


30. Van-Arkel method of refining Zirconium involves,

(1) removing all oxygen and nitrogen impurities.
(2) removing CO impurity
(3) removing Hydrogen impurity
(4) removing silica impurity

31. The composition of 'copper matte' is,

(1) Cu₂S + FeS    '
(2) Cu₂S + Cu₂O
(3) Cu₂S + FeO    
(4) Cu₂O + FeS

32. The complex formed when Al₂O₃ is leached from Bauxite using concentrated NaOH solution is,

(1) Na[Al(OH)₄]   
(2) NaAlO₂
(3) Na₃[Al(OH)₆]  
(4) Na₂AlO₂

33. The property which is not true about Fluorine is,

(1) Most of its reactions are exothermic.
(2) It forms only one oxo acid.
(3) Highest electronegativity.
(4) High F-F bond dissociation enthalpy.


34. Which is true regarding nitrogen ?

(1) Less electronegative
(2) Has low ionisation enthalpy
(3) d-orbitals are available
(4) Ability to form pπ - pπ bonds with itself

35. The shape of XeF₆ is,

(1) Square planar
(2) Distorted octahedral
(3) Square pyramidal
(4) Pyramidal

36. The number of isomers possible for the octahedral complex [CoCl₂(en)(NH₃)₂]⁺ is,

(1) Two
(2) Three
(3) No isomer
(4) Four isomers

37. CO is a stronger ligand than Cl⁻, because

(1) CO is a neutral molecule.
(2) CO has π-bonds.
(3) CO is poisonous.
(4) CO is more reactive.

38. The bivalent metal ion having maximum paramagnetic behaviour among the first transition series elements is,

(1) Mn²⁺
(2) Cu²⁺
(3) Sc²⁺
(4) Cu⁺


39. When a brown compound of Mn (A) is treated with HCl, it gives a gas (B). The gas (B) taken in excess reacts with NH₃ to give an explosive compound (C).

The compounds A, B and C are;

(1) A = MnO₂, B = Cl₂, C = NCl₃
(2) A = MnO, B = Cl₂, C = NH₄Cl
(3) A = Mn₃O₄, B = Cl₂, C = NCl₃
(4) A = MnO₃, B = Cl₂, C = NCl₂

40. Mn²⁺ compounds are more stable than Fe²⁺ compounds towards oxidation to their +3 state, because

(1) Mn²⁺ is more stable with high 3ʳᵈ Ionisation energy.
(2) Mn²⁺ is bigger in size.
(3) Mn²⁺ has completely filled d-orbitals.
(4) Mn²⁺ does not exist.

41. Which of the following sequence is correct regarding field strength of ligands as per spectrochemical series ?

(1) SCN⁻ < F⁻ < CN⁻ < CO    
(2) F⁻ < SCN⁻ < CN⁻ < CO
(3) CN⁻ < F⁻ < CO < SCN⁻    
(4) SCN⁻ < CO < F⁻ < CN⁻

42. As per IUPAC norms, the name of the complex [Co(en)₂(ONO)Cl]Cl is

(1) Chlorido bis(ethane-1, 2 – diamine) nitro-o-cobalt (III) chloride.
(2) Chloro bis(ethylene diamine) nitro-o-cobalt (III) chloride.
(3) Chlorido di(ethylene diamine) nitro cobalt (III) chloride.
(4) Chloro ethylene diamine nitro-o-cobalt (III) chloride.


43. In the following sequence of reactions :
A $\xrightarrow{\text{Reduction}}$ B $\xrightarrow{\text{HNO}_2}$ CH₃CH₂OH

The compound A is

(1) Propane nitrile
(2) Ethane nitrile
(3) CH₃NO₂
(4) CH₃NC

44. An organic compound A on reduction gives compound B, which on reaction with trichloro methane and caustic potash forms C. The compound 'C' on catalytic reduction gives N-methyl benzenamine, the compound 'A' is,

(1) Nitrobenzene
(2) Nitromethane
(3) Methanamine
(4) Benzenamine

45. Which of the following gives positive Fehling's solution test ?

(1) Sucrose
(2) Glucose
(3) Fats
(4) Protein

46. A liquid can exist only,

(1) Between triple point and critical point.
(2) At any temperature above melting point.
(3) Between melting point and critical point.
(4) Between boiling and melting points.


47. The energy of electron in the nth Bohr orbit of H-atom is

(1) $$\frac{-13.6}{n^2} eV$$

(2) $$\frac{-13.6}{n} eV$$

(3) $$\frac{-13.6}{n^4} eV$$

(4) $$\frac{-13.6}{n^3} eV$$

48. Consider the following sets of quantum numbers :
Which of the below setting is not permissible arrangement of electrons in an atom ?

| n     | l | m  | s    |
| ----- | - | -- | ---- |
| (1) 4 | 0 | 0  | -1/2 |
| (2) 5 | 3 | 0  | +1/2 |
| (3) 3 | 2 | -2 | -1/2 |
| (4) 3 | 2 | -3 | +1/2 |

49. The increasing order of bond order of O₂, O₂⁺, O₂⁻ and O₂²⁻ is

(1) O₂⁺, O₂, O₂⁻, O₂²⁻
(2) O₂²⁻, O₂⁻, O₂⁺, O₂
(3) O₂, O₂⁺, O₂⁻, O₂²⁻
(4) O₂²⁻, O₂⁻, O₂, O₂⁺

50. HCl gas is covalent and NaCl is an ionic compound. This is because
(1) Sodium is highly electro +Ve.
(2) Hydrogen is a non-metal.
(3) HCl is a gas.
(4) Electronegativity difference between H and Cl is less than 2.1.


51. Which of the following is not true ?
(1) In vulcanisation the rubber becomes harder and stronger.
(2) Natural rubber has 'trans' configuration at every double bond.
(3) Buna-S is a co-polymer of Butene and styrene.
(4) Natural rubber is 1, 4-polymer of isoprene.

52. Which of the following is a polyamide ?
(1) Nylon-6, 6         
(2) Terylene
(3) Polythene          
(4) Buna-S

53. Which of the following is correct about H-bonding in DNA ?
(1) A – T, G – C       '
(2) A – G, T – C
(3) G – T, A – C       
(4) A – A, T – T

54. Which of the following is employed as Tranquilizer ?
(1) Equanil            
(2) Naproxen
(3) Tetracyclin        
(4) Dettol

55. Reactivity of order of halides for dehydrohalogenation is
(1) R – F > R – Cl > R – Br > R – I
(2) R – I > R – Br > R – Cl > R – F
(3) R – I > R – Cl > R – Br > R – F
(4) R – F > R – I > R – Br > R – Cl


56. Main axis of diatomic molecule is Z. The orbitals Px and Py overlap to form

(1) π - molecular orbital    
(2) σ - molecular orbital
(3) δ - molecular orbital    
(4) No bond is formed.

57. The hybridisation of C in diamond, graphite and ethyne is in the order

(1) sp3, sp, sp2    
(2) sp3, sp2, sp
(3) sp, sp2, sp3    
(4) sp2, sp3, sp

58. A miscible mixture of C6H6 + CHCl3 can be separated by

(1) Sublimation    
(2) Distillation
(3) Filtration     
(4) Crystallisation

59. An organic compound contains C = 40%, H = 13.33% and N = 46.67%. Its emperical formula is

(1) C2H5N    
(2) C3H7N
(3) CH4N                
(4) CHN

60. Electrophile that participates in nitration of benzene is

(1) NO+    
(2) NO2+
(3) NO                
(4) NO3-
