
1. Select the correct statement :
(1) Roasting involves heating the ore in the absence of air
(2) Calcination involves heating the ore above its melting point
(3) Smelting involves heating the ore with suitable reducing agent and flux below its melting point
(4) Calcination of calcium carbonate is endothermic


2. NO₂ gas is :
(1) Colourless, neutral                             
(2) Colourless, acidic
(3) Brown, acidic                                   
(4) Brown, neutral


3. Identify the incorrect statement from the following :
(1) Oxides of nitrogen in the atmosphere can cause depletion of the ozone layer
(2) Ozone absorbs the intense ultraviolet radiation of Sun
(3) Depletion of ozone layer is because of its chemical reactions with chlorofluoro alkanes
(4) Ozone absorbs infrared radiation


4. Gold sol in not a :
(1) Macromolecular colloid         
(2) Lyophobic colloid
(3) Multimolecular colloid         
(4) Negatively charged colloid


5. The incorrect statement about Hall-Heroult process is :
(1) Carbon anode is oxidised to CO and CO₂
(2) Na₃AlF₆ helps to decrease the melting point of the electrolyte
(3) CaF₂ helps to increase the conductivity of the electrolyte
(4) Oxidation state of oxygen changes in the overall cell reaction


6. Propanone and Propanal are :
(1) Position isomers                                
(2) Functional isomers
(3) Chain isomers                                   
(4) Geometrical isomers


7. Sodium enthanoate on heating with soda lime give 'X'. Electrolysis of aqueous solution of sodium ethanoate gives 'Y', 'X' and 'Y' respectively are :
(1) Methane and Ethane                              
(2) Methane and Methane
(3) Ethane and Methane                              
(4) Ethane and Ethane


8. But-1-yne on reaction with dil. H₂SO₄ in presence of Hg²⁺ ions at 333 K gives :

(1) [Chemical structure with a methyl group attached to a carbon with a double bond to oxygen]

(2) [Chemical structure with CHO group]

(3) O                                              

(4)  CHO


9. Biologically active adrenaline and ephedrine used to increase blood pressure contain :
(1) Primary amino group                            
(2) Secondary amino group
(3) Tertiary amino group                           
(4) Quaternary ammonium salt


10. In the reaction

NaNO2        Phenol
Aniline vvvv^ vvvvv^P Q,
dil.HCl NaOH

'Q' is :
(1) C₆H₅N₂Cl                                      
(2) ortho-hydroxyazobenzene
(3) para-hydroxyazobenzene                         
(4) meta-hydroxyazobenzene


11. The female sex hormone which is responsible for the development of secondary female characteristics and
participates in the control of menstrual cycle is:
(1) Testosterone                                   
(2) Estradiol
(3) Insulin                                        
(4) Thyroxine


12. The type of linkage present between nucleotides is :
(1) Phosphoester linkage                           (2) Phosphodiester linkage
(3) Amide linkage                                  (4) Glycosidic linkage


13. > ■ ■ □ ■ D ✓ ■glucose and ^ ■ ■ □ ■ D ✓ ■ glucose are :
(1) Enantiomers                                    
(2) Conformers
(3) Epimers                                        
(4) Anomers


14. Which of the following set of polymers are used as fibre?
(i) Teflon               (ii) Starch               (iii) Terylene         (iv) Orlon
(1) (i) and (ii)                                   
(2) (ii) and (iii)
(3) (iii) and (iv)                                 
(4) (i) and (iv)


15. The biodegradable polymer obtained by polymerisation of Glycine and Aminocaproic acid is :
(1) Nylon 6                                        
(2) PHBV
(3) Nylon 2 - Nylon 6                              
(4) Nylon 6, 10


17. Which one of the following is a cationic detergent ?
(1) Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide                  (2) Sodium dodecylbenzene sulphonate
(3) Dodecylbenzene sulphonic acid                   (4) Dodecylbenzene


18. In the following scheme of reaction,
```
X
CH₂Cl ───┼─→ CH₂F
│
Y
├─→ CH₂=CH₂
│
Z
└─→ CH₄₁₀
```
X, Y and Z respectively are :
(1) AgF, alcoholic KOH and benzene                  
(2) HF, aqueous KOH and Na in dry ether
(3) Hg F₂₂, alcoholic KOH and Na in dry ether       
(4) CoF₂, aqueous KOH and benzene


19. 8.8 g of monohydric alcohol added to ethyl magnesium iodide in ether liberates 2240 cm³ of ethane at STP. This monohydric alcohol when oxidised using pyridinium-chlorochromate, forms a carbonyl compound that answers silver mirror test (Tollens' test). The monohydric alcohol is :
(1) butan-2-ol                                     
(2) 2, 2-dimethyl propan-1-ol
(3) pentan-2-ol                                    
(4) 2, 2-dimethyl ethan-1-ol


20. When a tertiary alcohol 'A' C₄H₁₀O reacts with 20% H₃PO₄ at 358 K, it gives a compound 'B' (C₄H₈) as a major product. The IUPAC name of the compound 'B' is :
(1) But-1-ene                                       
(2) But-2-ene
(3) Cyclobutane                                     
(4) 2-Methylpropene


21. PCC is :
(1) K₂Cr₂O₇ + Pyridine
(2) CrO₃ + CHCl₃
(3) CrO₃ + H₂SO₄
(4) A complex of chromium trioxide with pyridine + HCl


22. On treating 100 mL of 0.1 M aqueous solution of the complex CrCl₃. 6H₂O with excess of AgNO₃, 2.86 g of AgCl was obtained. The complex is :

(1) [Cr(H₂O)₃Cl₃].3H₂O            
(2) [Cr(H₂O)₄Cl₂]Cl.2H₂O
(3) [Cr(H₂O)₅Cl]Cl₂.H₂O           
(4) [Cr(H₂O)₆]Cl₃


23. The complex compounds [Co(NH₃)₅SO₄]⁺Br⁻ and [Co(NH₃)₅Br]SO₄⁻ are:
(1) Coordination isomers   
(2) Geometrical isomers
(3) Optical isomers        
(4) Ionisation isomer 

24. Which of the following statements are true about [CoF₆]³⁻ ion?
I. The complex has octahedral geometry.
II. Coordination number of Co is 3 and oxidation state is + 6.
III. The complex is sp³d² hybridised. IV. It is a high spin complex.
(1) I, II and IV    
(2) I, III and IV
(3) II and IV       
(4) II, III and IV

25. A haloalkane undergoes S₂ or S₁ₙ reaction depending on:
(1) Solvent used in the reaction       
(2) Low temperature
(3) The type of halogen atom           
(4) Stability of the haloalkane

26. 2-Methyl propane can be prepared by Wurtz reaction. The haloalkanes taken along with metallic sodium and dry ether are:
(1) chloromethane and 2-chloropropane   
(2) chloroethane and chloromethane
(3) chloroethane and 1-chloropropane    
(4) chloromethane and 1-chloropropane


27. In the analysis of III group basic radicals of salts, the purpose of adding NH₄Cl to NH₄OH is:
(1) To increase the concentration of OH⁻ ions.    
(2) To precipitate the radicals of group IV and V.
(3) To suppress the dissociation of NH₄OH.        
(4) To introduce Cl⁻ ions.



28. Solubility product of CaC₂O₄ at a given temperature in pure water is 4 × 10⁻⁹ mol² L⁻².
Solubility of CaC₂O₄ at the same temperature is:
(1) 6.3 × 10⁻⁵ mol L⁻¹    
(2) 2 × 10⁻⁵ mol L⁻¹
(3) 2 × 10⁻⁴ mol L⁻¹      
(4) 6.3 × 10⁻⁴ mol L⁻¹


29. In the reaction between moist SO₂ and acidified permanganate solution:
(1) SO is oxidised to SO₄²⁻; MnO₄⁻ is reduced to Mn²⁺
MnO is oxidised to MnO₄⁻
(2) SO is reduced to S; MnO₄⁻ is reduced to Mn²⁺
(3) SO is oxidised to SO₃²⁻; MnO₄⁻ is reduced to MnO₂
(4) SO is reduced to H₂S; MnO is oxidised to MnO₄⁻


30. Which one of the following properties is generally not applicable to ionic hydrides ?
(1) Non-volatile
(2) Non-conducting in solid state
(3) Crystalline
(4) Volatile


31. Which one of the following nitrate will decompose to give NO₂ on heating ?
(1) NaNO₃
(2) KNO₃
(3) RbNO₃
(4) LiNO₃


32. Which of the following halides cannot be hydrolysed ?
(1) CCl₄
(2) SiCl₄
(3) GeCl₄
(4) SnCl₄


33. 0.48 g of an organic compound on complete combustion produced 0.22 g of CO₂. The percentage of C in the given organic compound is :
(1) 25
(2) 50
(3) 12.5
(4) 87.5


34. In the given sequence of reactions, identify 'P', 'Q', 'R' and 'S' respectively.

```
CH₂ CH₂ ⟶ᴾCH₂ CH₂ ⟶ᵠCH₂ CH ⟶ᴿ CH ⟶ᶳ C₆H₆
|   |         |
Br  Br        Br
```

(1) Br⁻, Alc. KOH, NaOH, Al₂O₃
(2) HBr, Alc, KOH, CaC₂, KMnO₄
(3) HBr, Alc. KOH, NaNH₂, Red hot iron tube
(4) Br⁻, Alc. KOH, NaNH₂₂, Red hot iron tube


35. The first chlorinated organic insecticide prepared is :
(1) Gammexane
(2) Chloroform
(3) COCl₂
(4) DDT


36. Which of the following crystals has the unit cell such that a ≠ b ≠ c and α = γ = 90°, β = 120°?
(1) Zinc blende
(2) Graphite
(3) Cinnabar
(4) Potassium dichromate


37. MnO exhibits :
(1) Ferrimagnetism
(2) Antiferromagnetism
(3) Ferromagnetism
(4) Paramagnetism


38. The number of atoms in 4.5 g of a face-centred cubic crystal with edge length 300 pm is :
---
(Given density = 10 g cm⁻³ and NA 6.022 1023) .

(1) 6.6 1020                                      (2) 6.6 1023

(3) 6.6 1019                                      (4) 6.6 1022



39. Vapour pressure of a solution containing 18 g of glucose and 178.2 g of water at 100°C is :
(Vapour pressure of pure water at 100°C = 760 torr)
(1) 76.0 torr                                       (2) 752.4 torr
(3) 7.6 torr                                        (4) 3207.6 torr



40. A mixture of phenol and aniline shows negative deviation from Raoult's law. This is due to the formation
of:
(1) Polar covalent bond
(2) Non-polar covalent bond
(3) Intermolecular Hydrogen bond
(4) Intramolecular Hydrogen bond



41. Which one of the following pairs will show positive deviation from Raoult's Law?
(1) Water - HCl                                     
(2) Benzene - Methanol
(3) Water - HNO3                         
(4) Acetone - Chloroform



42. How many Coulombs are required to oxidise 0.1 mole of H₂O to oxygen?

(1) 1.93 105 C                           
(2) 1.93 104 C
(3) 3.86 104 C                           
(4) 9.65 103 C



43. A current of 3 A is passed through a molten calcium salt for 1 hr 47 min 13 sec. The mass of calcium
deposited is : (Molar mass of Ca 40gmol⁻¹)
(1) 6.0 g                                           
(2) 2.0 g
(3) 8.0 g                                           
(4) 4.0 g



44. The value of 'A' in the equation ζ = √(Λm°/A C) is same for the pair :
(1) NaCl and CaCl2                       
(2) CaCl2 and MgSO4
(3) NaCl and KBr                                    
(4) MgCl2 and NaCl



45. For the reaction, A ⇌ B,Ea 50kJmol⁻¹ and ΔH 20kJmol⁻¹. When a catalyst is added, Ea decreases by

10kJmol⁻¹. What is the Ea for the backward reaction in the presence of catalyst?

(1) 60kJmol⁻¹                                       
(2) 40kJmol⁻¹
(3) 70kJmol⁻¹                                      
(4) 20kJmol⁻¹

46. For the reaction PCl₅ ⇌ PCl₃ + Cl₂, rate and rate constant are 1.02 10⁻⁴ molL⁻¹s⁻¹ and
3.4 10⁻⁵s⁻¹ respectively at a given instant. The molar concentration of PCl₅ at that instant is :

(1) 8.0molL⁻¹
(2) 3.0molL⁻¹
(3) 0.2molL⁻¹
(4) 2.0molL⁻¹


47. Which one of the following does not represent Arrhenius equation?

(1) logk = logA - Ea / (2.303RT)
(2) k = Ae⁻ᴱᵃ/ᴿᵀ
(3) lnk = -Ea/RT + lnA
(4) k = Aeᴱᵃ/ᴿᵀ



48. Identify the incorrect statement :
(1) Values of colligative properties of colloidal solution are of small order compared to values of true solution
(2) Tyndall effect is observed only when diameter of the dispersed particles is not much smaller thanwavelength of incident light
(3) Colour of colloidal solution depends on the wavelength of light scattered by the dispersed particles
(4) Brownian movement is due to balanced bombardment of molecules of dispersion medium on colloidalparticles



49. For the coagulation of positively charged hydrated ferric-oxide sol, the flocculating power of the ions is in the order :

(1) PO₄³⁻ < SO₄²⁻ < Cl⁻ < [Fe(CN)₆]⁴⁻ ✓
(2) Cl⁻ < SO₄²⁻ < PO₄³⁻ < [Fe(CN)₆]⁴⁻
(3) SO₄²⁻ < Cl⁻ < PO₄³⁻ < [Fe(CN)₆]⁴⁻ ✓
(4) [Fe(CN)₆]⁴⁻ ✓ < PO₄³⁻



50. For which one of the following mixtures is composition uniform throughout?
(1) Sand and water
(2) Grains and pulses with stone
(3) Mixture of oil and water
(4) Dilute aqueous solution of sugar



51. The energy associated with first orbit is He⁺ is
(1) 0J 
(2) -8.72 10⁻¹⁸J
(3) -4.58 10^-18 J                            
(4) -0.545 10^-18J


52. A metalloid is
(1) Bi                                              
(2) Sb
(3) P                                               
(4) Se


53. A pair of isoelectric species having bond order of one is:
(1) N₂, CO                                         
(2) N₂, NO⁺
(3) O₂²⁻, F₂                                       
(4) CO, NO⁺


54. Identify the wrong relation for real gases

(1) Z VVidealreal                              
(2) Pideal Preal □ ___anV₂₂
(3) Vreal Videal ■ nb                    
(4) □□□p □ ___Va₂ □□□ ✔ V ■ b■■ RT

55. From the diagram

```
A □▼J
▲   2B
│
│
│
C □♥♥ J
```

ΔH for the reaction C→A is
(1) +35J                                           
(2) –15J
(3) –35J                                           
(4) +15J

56. The transition element ( ▲ 5%) present with lanthanoid metal in Misch metal is:
(1) Mg                                             
(2) Fe
(3) Zn                                             
(4) Co



57. Match the following:
I.   Zn²⁺    i. d⁸ configuration
II.  Cu²⁺    ii. colourless
III. Ni²⁺    iii. >1.73BM
I   II  II

(1) i   ii  iii

(2) ii  iii  i

(3) ii   i   iii

(4)  i  iii  ii



58. Which of the following statements related to lanthanoids is incorreect?
(1) Lanthanoids are silvery white soft metals
(2) Samarium shows +2 oxidation state
(3) Ce⁴⁺ solutions are widely used as oxidising agents in titrimetric analysis
(4) Colour of Lanthanoid ion in solution is due to d–d transition



59. The correct decreasing order of boiling point of hydrogen halides is
(1) HF > HCl > HBr > HI                             
(2) HI > HBr > HCl > HF
(3) HF > HI > HBr > HCl                              
(4) HI > HF > HBr > HCl



60. The synthetically produced radioactive noble gas by the collision of ²⁴⁹₉₈Cf with ₂₀⁴⁸Ca is
(1) Radon                                           
(2)Radium
(3) Oganesson                                       \
(4) Xenon
