
1. Aqueous solution of a salt (A) forms a dense white precipitate with BaCl₂ solution. The precipitate dissolves in dilute HCl to produce a gas (B) which decolourises acidified KMnO₄ solution. A and B respectively are:
(1) BaSO₃.H₂S             
(2) BaSO₄.SO₂
(3) BaSO₃.SO₂             
(4) BaSO₄.H₂S

2. Bond angle in PH₄⁺ is more than that of PH₃
This is because
(1) PH₃ has planar trigonal structure
(2) Hybridisation of P changes when PH₃ is converted to PH₄⁺
(3) Lone pair – bond pair repulsion exists in PH₃
(4) PH₄⁺ has a square planar structure

3. Incorrectly matched pair is:
(1) XeF₆ – distorted octahedral
(2) XeOF₄ – square pyramidal
(3) XeO₃ – pyramidal
(4) XeF₄ – tetrahedral

4. Phosphorous pentachloride
(1) Has all the five equivalent bond
(2) Exist as an ionic solid in which the cation has an octahedral structure and the anion has a tetrahedral structure
(3) On hydrolysis gives an oxo acid of phosphorus which is tribasic
(4) On hydrolysis given an oxo acid of phosphorous which is a good reducing agent

5. Identify the set of paramagnetic ions among the following:
(1) Ti³⁺, Cu²⁺, Mn³⁺       
(2) Sc³⁺, Ti³⁺, V³⁺
(3) V²⁺, Co²⁺, Zn²⁺        
(4) Ni²⁺, Cu²⁺, Zn²⁺

6. How many moles of K₂Cr₂O₇ is required to liberate 6 moles of I₂ an aqueous solution of I⁻?
(1) 0.25                   
(2) 0.5
(3) 2                      
(4) 1

7. Cu₂Cl₂ and CuCl₂ in aqueous medium
(1) Both are unstable
(2) Cu₂Cl₂ is more stable than CuCl₂
(3) CuCl₂ is more stable than Cu₂Cl₂
(4) Stability of Cu₂Cl₂ is equal to the stability of CuCl₂

8. The co – ordination number of Fe and Co in the complex ions [Fe(C₂O₄)₃]³⁻ and [Co(SCN)₄]²⁻
(1) 4 and 6                
(2) 6 and 4
(3) 3 and 4                
(4) 6 and 8

9. Number of stereoisomers exhibited by [Co(en₂)Cl₂]⁺ is
(1) 5                      
(2) 3
(3) 4                      
(4) 2

10. The IUPAC name of [Pt(NH₃)₄][PtCl₄] is
(1) Tetra ammine palatinate (0) tetra chloride platinum (IV)
(2) Tetra ammine platinum (II) tetra chloride palatinate (II)
(3) Tetra ammine platinum (0) tetra chloride platinum (IV)
(4) Tetra ammine palatinate (II) tetra chloride platinum (II)

11. Prolonged exposure of chloroform in humans may cause damage to liver. It is due to the formation of the following compound
(1) CH₂Cl₂                 
(2) Cl₂
(3) CCl₄                   
(4) COCl₂

12. Which of the following halides show the highest reactivity towards SN1 reactions?
(1) CH3 - CH2 - CH2 - CH2I
(2) C6H5Cl
(3) C6H5CH2Cl
(4) CH3CH2Cl

13. In the reaction
Reaction equation
The number of possible isomers for the compound is
(1) 3                    
(2) 2
(3) 4                    
(4) 5

14. Which of the following on heating gives ether as the major product?
P. C6H5CH2Br + CH3ONa
Q. C6H5ONa + CH3Br
R. (CH3)3C - Cl + CH3ONa
S. C6H5CH = CHCl + CH3ONa
(1) Both Q and S        
(2) Both P and Q
(3) Both R and S        
(4) Both P and R

15. The steps involved in the conversion of propan - 2 - ol to propan - 1 - ol are in the order
(1) Heating with PCl5, heating with alc.KOH, hydroboration - oxidation
(2) Dehydration, addition of HBr in the presence of a peroxide, heating with alc.KOH
(3) Dehydration, addition of HBr, heating with alc.KOH
(4) Heating with PCl5, heating with alc.KOH, acid catalysed addition of water

16. Which of the following is the strongest base?
(1) OH-
(2) CH3O-
(3) CH3COO-
(4) Cl-

18. Which of the following has the lowest boiling point?
(1) CH3 - O - CH3
(2) HCOOH
(3) CH3CH2OH
(4) CH3CH2NH2

19. The carbonyl compound that does not undergo aldol condensation is
(1) Trichloroacetaldehyde
(2) Acetaldehyde
(3) Acetone
(4) Dichloroacetaldehyde

21. Hinsberg's reagent is
(1) C₆H₅SO₂NH₂
(2) CH₃COCl / pyridine
(3) (CH₃CO)₂O / pyridine
(4) C₆H₅SO₂Cl

22. Which of the following vitamins is not stored in the adipose tissue?
(1) D
(2) E
(3) A
(4) B₆

23. Hypothyroidism is caused by the deficiency of
(1) Thryoxine
(2) glucocorticoid
(3) Vitamin B – 12
(4) Adrenalin

24. C₁–C₄ glycosidic bond is NOT found in
(1) Lactose
(2) Starch
(3) Maltose
(4) Sucrose

25. Which of the following polymers has the strongest intermolecular forces of attraction?
(1) Polythene
(2) Polystyrene
(3) Neoprene
(4) Terylene

26. Which of the following monomers can undergo condensation polymerisation?
(1) Isoprene
(2) Propene
(3) Styrene
(4) Glycine

27. A food additive that also acts as an anti – oxidant is
(1) Sugar syrup
(2) Salt
(3) BHA
(4) Saccharin

28. Which of the following is not related to drug – enzyme interaction?
(1) Co – enzymes
(2) Enzyme inhibitor
(3) Allosteric site
(4) Antagonist

29. 0.4 g of Dihydrogen is made to react with 7.1 g of dichloride to form hydrogen chloride. The volume of hydrogen chloride formed at 273 K and 1 bar pressure is
(1) 90.8 L
(2) 45.4 L
(3) 9.08 L
(4) 4.54 L

30. With regard to photoelectric effect, identify the correct statement among the following
(1) Number of electrons ejected increases with the increase in work function
(2) Number of electrons ejected increases with the increases of incident light
(3) Energy of ejected electrons increases with the increases in the intensity of incident light
(4) Numbers of electrons ejected increases with the increases in the frequency of the incident light

31. The last element of the p – Block in the 6ᵗʰ period is represented by the outer most electronic configuration:
(1) 4f¹⁴5d¹⁰6s²6p⁴
(2) 4f¹⁴5d¹⁰6s²6p⁶
(3) 7s²7p⁶
(4) 4f¹⁴6d¹⁰7s²7p⁶

32. The conjugate base of NH₃ is
(1) NH₂OH
(2) NH₂⁻
(3) NH₄⁺
(4) NH₄OH

33. A gas mixture contains 25% He and 75% CH₄ by volume at a given temperature and pressure. The percentage by mass of methane in the mixture is approximately
(1) 92%
(2) 8%
(3) 75%
(4) 25%

34. The percentage of s – character in the hybrid orbitals of nitrogen in NO₂⁺, NO₃⁻ and NH₄⁺ respectively are
(1) 50%, 33.3%, 25%
(2) 25%, 50%, 33.3%
(3) 33.3%, 50%, 25%
(4) 33.3%, 25%, 50%

35. The formal charge on the central oxygen atom in ozone is:
(1) +2
(2) +1
(3) -1
(4) 0


36. When the same quantity of heat is absorbed by a system at two different temperatures T₁and T₂ such that T₁ > T₂ change in entropies are ΔS₁ and ΔS₂ respectively. Then
(1) S₂ > S₁
(2) ΔS₂ < S₁
(3) ΔS₁ < S₂
(4) ΔS₂ = S₁

37. The oxidation number of nitrogen atoms in NH₄NO₃ are:
(1) +3,-5
(2) -3,-3
(3) +5,-5
(4) -3,+5

38. A Lewis acid 'X' reacts with LiAlH₄ in ether medium to give a highly toxic gas. This gas when heated with NH₃ gives a compound commonly know as inorganic benzene. The gas is
(1) B₃N₃H₆
(2) BF₃
(3) B₂O₃
(4) B₂H₆

39. The oxide of potassium that does NOT exist is:
(1) K₂O₂
(2) K₂O₃
(3) K₂O
(4) KO₂

40. The metal that produces H₂ with both dil. HCl and NaOH(aq) is
(1) Ca
(2) Fe
(3) Zn
(4) Mg

41. Which of the following is not a pair of functional isomers?
(1) CH₃CH₂NO₂ and H₂NCH₂COOH
(2) CH₃COOH and HCOOCH₃
(3) C₂H₅OC₂H₅ and C₃H₇OCH₃
(4) CH₃CH₂OH and CHOCH₃


43. Which of the following is NOT a group greenhouse gas?
(1) O₂
(2) NO₂
(3) CFC
(4) CO₂

44. A metal exists as an oxide with the formula M₀.₉₆O. Metal M can exist as M²⁺ and M³⁺ in its oxide M₀.₉₆O. The percentage of M³⁺ in the oxide is nearly:
(1) 5%
(2) 9.6%
(3) 8.3%
(4) 4.6 %

45. A metal crystallizes in a face centred cubic structure having a metallic radius of √2A. The volume of the unit cell (in m³) is
(1) 4×10⁻⁹
(2) 6.4×10⁻³⁰
(3) 4×10⁻¹⁰
(4) 6.4×10⁻²⁹

46. Silicon doped with gallium forms:
(1) An intrinsic semiconductor
(2) P – type semiconductor
(3) N – type semiconductor
(4) Both n and p type semiconductor

47. The pair of electrolytes that possess the same value for the constant (A) in the Debye – Huckel – Onsager equation
$$\lambda_m = \lambda_m^\circ - A\sqrt{C}$$
(1) NaBr, MgSO₄
(2) NaCl, CaCl₂
(3) MgSO₄, Na₂SO₄
(4) NH₄Cl, NaBr



48. Which of the following pairs of solution are isotonic?
(1) 0.001 M CaCl₂ and 0.001 M Al₂(SO₄)₃
(2) 0.01 M BaCl₂ and 0.001 M CaCl₂
(3) 0.01 M BaCl₂ and 0.015 M NaCl
(4) 0.001 M Al₂(SO₄)₃ and 0.01M BaCl₂

49. Solute 'X' dimerises in water to an extent of 80%. 2.5 g of 'X' in 100 g of water increase the boiling point by 0.3°C. The molar mass of X is: [Kb = 0.52 Kkgmol⁻¹]
(1) 65
(2) 26
(3) 13
(4) 52

50. Given E°Fe³⁺/Fe²⁺ = +0.76 and E°I₂/I⁻ = +0.55 V. The equilibrium constant for the reaction taking place in the galvanic cell consisting of the above two electrodes is:
[2.303RT/F = 0.06]
(1) 3×10⁸
(2) 5×10¹²
(3) 1×10⁸
(4) 1×10⁹

51. If an aqueous solution of NaF is electrolyzed between inert electrodes, the product obtained at the anode is:
(1) Na
(2) O₂
(3) F₂
(4) H₂

52. In which of the following cases a chemical reaction is possible
(1) Conc. HNO₃ is stored in a platinum vessel
(2) Gold ornaments are washed with dil. HCl
(3) ZnSO₄ is placed in a copper vessel
(4) AgNO₃ solution is stirred with a copper spoon

53. The time required for 60% completion of a first order reaction is 50 min. The time required for 93.6% completion of the same reaction will be
(1) 50 min
(2) 150 min
(3) 100 min
(4) 83.8 min

54. For an elementary reaction 2A + 3B → 4C + D, the rate of appearance of C at time 't' is 2.8×10⁻³ mol L⁻¹S⁻¹. Rate of disappearance of B at 't' will be
(1) 2(2.8×10⁻³) molL⁻¹S⁻¹
(2) 1/4(2.8×10⁻³) mol L⁻¹S⁻¹
(3) 4/3(2.8×10⁻³) mol L⁻¹S⁻¹
(4) 3/4(2.8×10⁻³) mol L⁻¹S⁻¹

55. The rate constant of a reaction is given by k = PZe⁻ᴱᵃ/ᴿᵀ under standard notation. In order to speed up the reaction, which of the following factors has to be decreased?
(1) Ea
(2) T
(3) Z
(4) Both z and T

56. A sol of AgI is prepared by mixing equal volumes of 0.1 M AgNO₃ and 0.2M KI, which of the following statement is correct?
(1) Sol obtained is a positive sol with K⁺ adsorbed on AgI
(2) Sol obtained is a negative sol with I⁻ adsorbed on AgI
(3) Sol obtained is a negative sol with NO₃⁻ adsorbed on AgI
(4) Sol obtained is a positive sol with Ag⁺ adsorbed on AgI


57. During adsorption of a gas on a solid
(1) ΔG < 0, ΔH < 0.ΔS > 0
(2) ΔG < 0, ΔH > 0.ΔS > 0
(3) ΔG < 0, ΔH < 0.ΔS < 0
(4) ΔG > 0. ΔH > 0.ΔS > 0

58. Copper is extracted from copper pyrites by
(1) Electrometallurgy
(2) Auto reduction
(3) Thermal decomposition
(4) Reduction by coke

59. Function of potassium ehtylxanthate in
forth floatation process is to make ore:
(1) Hydrophilic           (2) Heavier
(3) Lighter               (4) Hydrophobic

60. Sulphide ore on roasting gives a gas X, X
reacts with Cl₂ in the presence of activated
charcoal to give: Y: Y is
(1) SCl₆                  (2) SOCl₂
(3) SO₂Cl₂                (4) S₂Cl₂

# Missing questions 17, 19 and 42....